Father said, “We can take very little with us.” The list was in his hand. “Spade, saw, ﬁle, ax, for each family. Seeds, etc., will be provided. Iron rations will be provided. For each voyager a Change of clothing, a  pair of boots, one or two personal items only; e.g., a favorite cooking pan, a musical l instrument (small and light), a picture (unframed). Nothing under this heading will I  be taken if it is bulky or heavy, fragile or perishable. One book per voyager.”

It was easy to pack. We were allowed so little, and we didn’t have to bother about leaving anything tidy behind us. Only the books caused a little delay. Father said, “I must take this." He showed us an ugly big volume called A Dictionary of Intermediate Technology. “But you must choose yourselves,” he said. “It wouldn’t be  fair of me to choose for you. Think carefully.”

We didn’t think. We were excited, disturbed, and we hadn’t really understood that everything else would be left behind. Father looked wistfully at the shelves. He picked up The Oxford Complete Shakespeare. “Have you all chosen your books?" he asked.
“Yes,” we told him. He put the Shakespeare back.
We had time to waste at the end. We ate everything we could ﬁnd.
"I don’t want to eat iron," Pattie said, but nobody knew what she meant.

Then Father got out the slide projector, and showed us pictures of holidays we had once had. We didn’t think much of them.

“Have they all gone brownish with age, Dad?” said Joe, our brother, the eldest of us.

“No,” said Father. “The pictures are all right. It’s the light that has changed. It’s been getting colder and bluer now for years  but when I was young it was this  lovely golden color, just like this — look.”
But what he showed us — a beach, with a blue sea, and the mother we couldn’t remember lying on a towel, reading a book — looked a funny hue, as though someone had brushed it over with a layer of treacle.


The voyagers need paper. Pattie’s father asks her for her empty notebook. “Heavens!” said Father. “What's this?” He read for a few moments. "It’s a story, ” he said. “About here, about us. It has the moth people in it, and the hexagonal wheat!" “Read it to us,” said Jason’s mother, and others joined in. “Read it to us!" Lots of people, the people of Shine, gathered around Father with the open book in his hand, all eager, and  ready to make the words huge with listening to them. Father turned back and back in the green book to the very ﬁrst page, and began to read:  "Father said, ’ We can take very little with us’... ”

"Well, take my arm, Axel, and let us follow the windings of the shore.”
I eagerly accepted, and we began to coast along this new sea. On the left huge pyramids of rock, piled one upon another, produced a prodigious titanic effect. Down their sides flowed numberless waterfalls, which went on their way in brawling but pellucid streams. A few light vapours, leaping from rock to rock, marked the place of hot springs; and streams flowed softly down to the common basin, gliding down the gentle slopes with a softer murmur.
But at that moment my attention was drawn to an unexpected sight. At a distance of five  hundred paces, at the turn of a high promontory, appeared a high, tufted, dense forest. It was composed of trees of moderate height, formed like umbrellas, with exact geometrical outlines. The currents of wind seemed to have had no effect upon their shape, and in the midst of the windy blasts they stood unmoved and firm, iust like a clump of petrified cedars.

I hastened forward. I could not give any name to these singular creations. Were they some of the two hundred thousand species of vegetables known hitherto, and did they claim a place of their own in the lacustrine flora? No; when we arrived under their shade my surprise turned into admiration. There stood before me productions of earth, but of gigantic stature, which my uncle immediately named.  lt is only a forest of mushrooms,” said he.



As Mum reached for the phone, Chitty lurched into reverse. Mum was thrown back into her seat. The phone tumbled to the ﬂoor. Suddenly the big shiny handle of Chitty’s Chronojuster clunked to the bottom of its slot. Before they knew it, the car was speeding backwards down the middle lane.
“Dad! You can’t do this!” yelled Jem. “You’re driving backwards down the motorway ...”

Lucy couldn’t bear to look. Little Harry put his ﬁngers in his ears. Iem stared in horriﬁed fascination at the cars behind them rushing towards them. Except they weren’t rushing towards them. They seemed to be going backwards too. It wasn’t a motorway any more, just an ordinary road.

“That’s good, ” said Dad. “Trees are good.”

But he couldn’t help but notice that the lane no longer had tarmac and road signs. It was just a track, a white dusty track cut into the chalk. The trees too were surprisingly tall. They were thicker. The air was damp and hot. The undergrowth was thick and steamy. So thick and steamy that Chitty had to stop to catch her breath (the engine was air-cooled).

“Dinosaurs!” shouted Little Harry.
“Yes, yes, when we get home we’ll ﬁnd your dinosaur, ” said Mum. “Now shush while I check the map. We seem to be lost.”

But jem knew that you should never tell Little Harry to be quiet. Never ignore what he was saying. If Little Harry said dinosaurs, then that strange, heavy thumping that seemed to be coming nearer and nearer through the trees that splintering of wood and crunching of rocks  that hideous, mucousy roar that almost deafened you...

“I know this sounds strange,” said Mum, pointing nervously off to the left, “but isn’t that ...?”
“Dinosaurs!” yelled Little Harry.
"Tyrannosaurus rex, to be precise,” said Lucy, “from the Latin for ‘king of the terrible lizards ’.”
"The word today, " said Dad, “would seem to be Jurassic.”
“Not to be picky, ” observed Lucy as the giant beast came crashing towards them through the trees, “but I think you’ll ﬁnd that the word today is actually Cretaceous.”
“Dinosaurs!”
“I think Chitty just engaged her Chronojuster,” said J


voyage ration hue mission colony empathise brackets titanic vapours geologist science time travel promontory ax spade tooling impromptu 
prodigious pellucid promontory petrified flora productions bizarre 
















Session 9 Going back in time     73
