Bethlehem Alemu, founder and managing director of soleRebels Footwear, is making a difference by creating jobs and hope out of old car tyres!
In 2004, Bethlehem Tilahun Alemu left her ordinary accountancy job and started making shoes! Today, her company soleRebels is Africa’s largest footwear brand, with her shoes selling in over 50 countries worldwide.
Alemu is one of Africa’s most celebrated businesswomen. She has featured on the front cover of magazines and was selected as a “Young Global Leader" by the World Economic Forum 2011. She has even won the award for “Most Outstanding Businesswoman” at the annual African Business Awards.
You may be wondering about the secret to her success. Well, it’s no secret! Her enthusiasm is contagious as she describes how her success is based on creating jobs by making use of local skills, natural resources and business opportunities. Bethlehem describes how she came up with her brainchild.
“Having grown up in a small village (near Addis Ababa), watching our family and neighbours struggling, we decided to create the ’ better life time ’’ we were all waiting for by harnessing our community’s incredible artisan skills and channelling them into a sustainable, global, fair trade footwear business."
soleRebels Footwear includes sandals, ﬂip flops and shoes with soles made from recycled car tyres. Her designs use recycled and sustainable materials with hand-spun organic cotton fabrics, and natural ﬁbres including pure Abyssinian koba!
“We took this wonderful indigenous age-old recycling tradition and fused it with fantastic Ethiopian crafts and modern design and turned it into footwear with universal ﬂavour and appeal."
You are sure to catch a sparkle in her eye as she concludes, “Our motto at soleRebels is: 'Making the world a better place, one step at a time ’. So have fun, help others and be proud that you are making the world a better place. What more could you ask from your shoes?”


Recycling has become a ’ buzz ’ word for today’s generation. Environmentalists are lobbying for  people to change their lifestyles and do something about the waste they generate. However, not everyone is aware of this ’ war on waste ’ and many seem unclear what all the fuss is about.

Recycling means collecting discarded waste and using it to create a different product. Old items can be recycled in different ways. For example, old tyres can be reused whole as road barriers or swings for children, or they can be melted down and the rubber used to make new things such as building materials, tiles and sports surfaces.

Years ago, before the invention of plastics and other non—biodegradable materials, disposing of waste was less of a concern. Now that people produce so much non—biodegradable waste, it is more difficult to find places to store it.
Much waste is dumped in landfill sites. However, landfill sites take up large areas of land and the waste may remain therefor many years — perhaps even centuries — and can pollute the environment. Recycling is an alternative way of dealing with it, reducing the amount of waste in the environment and protecting the planet from pollution.
Recycling is also important in the effort to reduce the amount of new materials used for manufacturing things. This is necessary because there is not an unlimited supply of natural resources and they may run out. Furthermore, it can also be more cost-effective to reuse old materials instead of using new ones. So recycling can help save money! 


reduce reuse recycle sustainable magazine tyre sequence novel 
pomegrnate jasmine copse exotic veined tangerines silken tongued delight astringency tropical capsule acacia displacement voluptuous luscious 
