Yesterday, a black woman was arrested on Montgomery bus, for refusing to relinquish her seat to a white passenger. Two policemen were called to the scene by The bus driver, who accused the woman of being disorderly and defiant.
Rosa Parks, a 42—year—old seamstress at a local department store, boarded the bus after work last evening and sat in the section reserved for black passengers, as required by The segregation law in Alabama. When the white section of the bus filled up, the driver, Mr James Blake, demanded that she vacate her seat. Mrs Parks, who claims she was tired after a day at work, refused to move. The driver called the policemen, who arrested her and removed her.

Mrs Parks, a senior member of the local branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), is no stranger to public attention. She and her husband Raymond, also a member of The NAACP, are both active in helping black people to register to vote and have taken part in numerous protests against the segregation laws. Previously, she was thrown off a bus when she refused to use the back door (The door black passengers are required To use).
Mrs Parks’s court appearance will take place on Monday when she will be charged with disorderly conduct and defying segregation law. Members of the colored community have called for a bus boycott in protest at her arrest.

One evening in early December 1955 I was sitting in the front seat of the colored section of a bus in Montgomery, Alabama. The white people were sitting in the white section. More white people got on, and they ﬁlled up all the seats in the white section. When that happened, we black people were supposed to give up our seats to the whites. But I didn’t move. The white driver said, “Let me have those front seats.” I didn’t get up. I was tired of giving in to white people. "I’m going to have you arrested,” the driver said. "You may do that,” I answered. Two white policemen came. I asked one of them, “Why do you all push us around?" He answered, "I don’t know, but the law is the law and you’re under arrest.”
   

headline article lead obituary chronological ballon commands current lead tone boasting dinner aviation pioneer activist attempt vessels reputation charted commercial navigation 

brook strem cataract gralying surge eddy recoil critic bitter gray haunts coot hern bicker thorpes eddying chappter lusty trout lamb 
melancholy 
