
A group of scientists associated with the United Nations has just issued a report on ‘climate change’.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has conﬁrmed that human habits and activity are responsible for global warming and for higher sea levels. If this continues, according to the report, there will be more serious heat waves, more melting of land  ice, and dramatic changes in plant and animal life. Because it is a draft, the report is still being reviewed, but experts in climate change believe there won’t be many changes in the ﬁnal version.
The report is published by a different group of scientists every ﬁve or six years, and is considered the standard on the risks of climate change. Each report has found more evidence that the planet is warming and that humans are the cause. Some critics believe that the current situation is more likely due to short—term factors or weather cycles. They believe that the climate situation will change on its own eventually. But the UN report says the reality is clear and the facts are there.
Luckily, because humans cause the problem, humans can help solve the problem. Everyone can use less energy (light and electricity), recycle and reuse, and use their cars less. If this happens, less carbon dioxide will be released into the air and the air closest to the Earth will cool down. And that would be a good thing.


Air pollution is a serious issue and it affects us all directly. Action may be needed to reduce air pollution created by the traffic on our roads.
In the past few decades a significant increase in the number of cars on the road has resulted in more carbon dioxide emissions.
scientists are warning that high levels of CO2 in the atmosphere cause the earth to heat up.
As a result, we are experiencing more extreme weather patterns. In addition, air pollution in cities causes health problems like asthma. A ban on cars in city centres would therefore reduce air pollution and also improve traffic jams and health issues.

 On the other hand, such a ban could create other problems. In some cities, public transport is expensive, Unreliable or non—existent. In addition, public transport systems would need to be upgraded to cope with greater demand; this requires time and money. Furthermore, personal choice is an issue. For example some people enjoy using public transport but others feel safer in their cars than on a bus or a train. Hence, they may object to being forced to use another mode of transport.

While there is clearly an urgent need to reduce air pollution, we could achieve this in a number of ways. Rather than banning cars in cities, people could be made aware of the issues and encouraged to use less fuel and make use of public transport where possible.


The tuxedoed seabirds’ homeland is melting beneath their feet as global warming strikes hard in Antarctica and elsewhere.
As Dee Boersma sees it, penguins could be environmentalists ’ best allies in the fight against global warming.

"Mounting evidence points to climate change as the greatest threat to penguins, especially those species breeding in the Antarctic region,” she says. "These elegant creatures are global sentinels, and they’re telling us that something is very wrong. Maybe policy-makers will pay attention. After all, I’ve never meta person who didn’t love penguins.”
Penguins cope with a host of problems, from habitat loss, alien animals, guano mining, deadly trawl nets and capricious weather systems to food shortages from overfishing.

arctic antartica continent argument balanced biased opposing emotive yet ante anti constellation climate change personal impersonal unbiased shrinking melting warming strikes penguins elegant cope alien guano trawl capricious 

nonsense poetic licence visual auditory portmanteau auditory tooters toot 

shakespeare manga theatre medium mutlimedia incandescent ulysses cynic illuminate bard extended metaphor plot climax loose reflection scene txist along comic illuminated cynic 

