Houses are built from different materials. Some houses are made of wood because people can cut down trees to get wood. Some wooden houses are very old, but some are very new.
Some houses are mode from brick and stone. These materials mokes strong, thick wolls. If you live where it is cold and there is a loT of wind, you need strong, thick walls.
Tall apartment blocks ore built in cities because there isn’t enough space to build houses for everyone. They are made out of a steel frame ﬁlled with concrete or glass. Steel is a very, very strong metal. You need a strong material because tall buildings are very heavy. Tall buildings need to stay upright even if the wind is blowing hard.


Roofs are on top of the house so they can give shelter from rain, cold winds and the hot sun.
In some countries where there is a lot of rain, roofs are built with slopes on them so the rain goes down the slope and onto the ground.
In hoT, sunny countries people need roofs to provide shade during the day. Sometimes, the roofs are flat so that people can enjoy sitting on them in the evenings when it is not too hot. Some people sleep on the roofs of their houses. All houses have roofs  Unit 5 WhaT is my house made of?'

About 100 years ago, people discovered how to make long solid beams of iron and this allowed them to start building tall buildings called skyscrapers. Later, people learned how to make beams of steel, which is lighter, so builders could build even taller buildings.
First, builders dig lots of holes  deep into the ground to support the weight of the building.
They put joining rods across the uprights so they can make ﬂoors.
Finally, The builders use glass and concrete to ﬁll in the gaps between the steel poles to make rooms with walls, ﬂoors and ceilings.

Dens are shelters that children can hide or play in. They can be built almost anywhere. They can be any size or shape.
Inside dens can be built by putting blankets over tables or chairs.


different homes  listener materials sloping flat sloped roofs sit explanations explanantory layers roof trunks mud clay walls gap lets light detached terraced apartment brick appear disappear obey barks extra space skyscrapers rods compound 


pop in out road layout repetition wrote back dared laid basket rhythm muddle award adult plates winder valley hills still baby gurgles hums happily sucking thumbs hoarder buries little treasures keep countryside along apostrophe treasures echoes bloom waterfall busy downhill racer popping recognising features park surf sort search pass 
 
