Bears are big, hairy and grumpy with short, stumpy tails. Bears weren’t always like that though. Once, long ago, bears were different. They were still big and hairy, but they were sweet and kind, and had long, ﬂuffy tails. Bears were proud of their tails in those days. How did bears get Stumpy tails? Why are they so grumpy now? Fox is to blame. Let me tell you what fox did.
Fox was trotting about one cold day,looking for something to eat. He saw a ﬁsherman by a frozen lake, dangling a line through a hole in the ice. The ﬁsherman had caught a lot of fish. They were lying in the snow, tied together with string. Fox was hungry. Fox was sly and quick. He sneaked up, grabbed the string of fish, and ran as fast as he could! In the forest, he met Bear. Bear was hungry too. Fox saw that Bear’s tail was even longer and ﬂuffier than his. Fox did not like that one bit.
He did not want to share his fish either. S0 Fox said, “i caught these fish!” “How?” asked Bear.“All you have to do is break a hole in the ice on‘ the lake,” said Fox. “Then you sit down and put your tail in the water.”

He lives in the mountains. He never helps his mother. He is a very lazy boy who sits outside all day doing nothing. She works very hard. She has had enough of Ramay’s lazy ways. She wants him to go and ﬁnd some honest work. He is a wild monster living in a cave in the mountains. His hair is as thick as a bear’s to keep out the cold. It is as white as the snow to help him hide. He is sometimes called an ‘abominable snowman’. “Abominable means ‘terrible’. He is a terrible monster  or is he?

Ramay’s mother sends him away to mend his ways. He walks off into the mountains.
Ramay Chats to himself and scares the Shokpa who is in the cave beneath him. He realises that he has tricked the Shokpa‘ into thinking that he, Ramay, is a monster. The Shokpa gives Ramay a wishing stick to make him go away and not eat him.

On his way home Ramay stays the night with an old woodcutter. He tells the woodcutter about the wishing stick. Later, as Ramay sleeps, the old woodcutter tricks him by swapping the wishing stick; for an old piece of wood.

The next morning Ramoy leaves with the old piece of wood. At home he shows his mother how the wishing stick con  their wishes, but it doesn’t work. His mother is angry with him and Ramay is angry with the Shokpo. He does not suspect the old woodcutter.
Ramay runs book to the Shokpa but Ramay hears that it was the old woodcutter who had tricked him. The Shokpa gives Ramay a new wishing stick which will chase anyone who touches it without permission. Ramay returns to the woodcutter who again steals the new wishing stick at night. This time the wishing stick chases him until Ramay tells it to stop. Ramay returns home with the two wishing sticks. He makes wishes for his mother as well as for the kind Shokpa and his fomily.

Long ago in the mountains of Japan, there lived a stonecutter called Yoshi. He was a poor man with a bent back and hard hands from cutting stone.

“Rocks are more powerful than clouds,” grumbled Yoshi. “I wish I could be a rock.” The whisper replied, “Your wish is granted,Yoshi — a rock you will be.” Now Yoshi was a rock — huge, hard and solid. “Nothing can be stronger than me,” he boasted. He did not fear the sun or the rain. Then Yoshi the rock felt tools cutting into him. “A stonecutter is stronger than me!” said Yoshi. “I wish I could be a man again. ”The whisper smiled. “Your wish is granted, Yoshi — a man you will be.”



Yoshi the stonecutter picked up his tools and started to work. His back was bent and he waspoor — but now he was happy.

hang ribbons tea good manners dining room wipe burp pardon settee lump dunk biscuits crumbs budgie tease peke speak told able print tie laces 
choose black football flashing light heel and red laces playing park new salesman funny faces muddy places leaving arriving aunts suit saleslady buckles pearls pointy shoes end curls buttons bows vowel wings fairy rings magic springs stepping over seas jumping into tress special clock clockwork keys never lose wonderful catch buy pair helicopter blades described seas bows

tales around animals tails muddled 
stripy swing from trees monkey turn noow thin thick plain patterned furry scaly 
here hear buy bye speelings probably bears traditional grumpy North america scandinavia smilar live fox storyteller 

stumpy frozen broke tingled snapped stump masks tricks another king ju relationship between abominable snowman comparing coal knives roar nails piercing simile section hidden cave rotten trickster beaten practice aloud phonics setting wished brave clever kind greedy silly lonely 
displeased unkind distrusted disappeared unhappy prefix helpful woodcutter gold meaning japan country map globe map yesterday far away whisper joined prince powerful rich granted prediction predict fed up silly jealous learned 
circular straight twists turn lucky feels stupid greedy behave scale 
