“What’s up, Louie? Why so sad?” Barney asked. “Well,” Louie said, “the other children call you the junkman.” “Junk?” Barney growled. “They should know better than to call this junk. All a person needs is some imagination! And alittle of that stuff can take you right out of this world.” Louie and his parents got to work. “What’s going on?” the other children asked. “l’m going out of this world,” Louie answered.The kids snickered and nudged each other. “is that Voyager Hi?” they laughed. “No,” he said. “lt’s lMAGlNATlON l!”“Well don’t run out of gas!”

 “Are you going out there all alone?” Susie asked. “Well, that depends — got lots of imagination?” he asked. “Oh yes,” she said. “And l’ll bring cookies too!” 
The next morning they climbed aboard. “ Ready when you are,” Susie shouted. “Okay then,” yelled Louie. “Blast off!” l- They held their breath. l‘BAARROOOMMM!
Way out in space they opened their eyes. a “We did it!” Susie gasped. They stared dowria ‘They floated past strange and wondrous things“. and on through worlds no-one had ever seen befor.
“There’s a rock storm heading this way.We’ll be smashed to bits!” cried Louie.
They ducked this way — and that — and over — land under — and upside down.
The next day, they told every body about their ‘adventures. Soon all the kids were ready to take off.

Once there was a boy and the boy loved stars very much. Every night the boy watched the stars from his window and wished he had one of his very own. The boy decided he would try to catcha star. He thought that getting up early in the morning would be best, because then the star would be tired from being up in the sky all night. So, the next day he set out at sunrise. But he could not see a star anywhere. He sat down and waited for one to appear. He waited and he waited  and ate lunch  and waited. And after dinner he waited some more.

Finally, just before the sun was about to go away, he saw a star. The boy tried to jump up and grab it. But he could not jump high enough. Say very carefully, he climbed to the top the tallest tree he could ﬁnd. 
But the star was still way out of reach. He thought he could ﬂy up in his spaceship and just grab the star. But his spaceship had run out of petrol last Tuesday when he ﬂew to the moon. The boy thought he would never catch star. Just then he noticed something ﬂoating in the water.

It was the prettiest star he had ever seen. Just a baby star. It must have fallen from the sky. He tried to fish the star out with his hands. But he couldn’t reach it. Then he had an idea. The star might wash up on the shore. He ran back along the jetty to the beach. Then he waited and walked and watched and waited  and, sure enough, the star washed upon the bright, golden sand. The boy had caught a star. A star of his very own.



eyes mouth hand feet ear nose shoulder eyebrows teeth shoulder
body 
eyes can see 
mouth can talk 
ears can hear 
feet can walk
nose can smell
teeth can bite 
eyebrows can wiggle 
hand can write
see blink wink open close
spy 
hands up to the ceiling touch the floor reach up again more touch knee sick doctor come quick bah hat knocked door rat dolly shk straight bed wrote on the paper will pill hot cross aching head prickly tickly itchy bed 
piles of books toys puzzles heavy feet pillows thrown all anyhow wrinkles sheet sick of medicine lemonade soup spooned from a cup better get up out loud birthday party stand up tall take deep breath smile before begin 
say each word slowly clearly speak with a strong loud voice
forgot old sing happy off plan shiny new silly squashed tomatoes stew egg muffins for breakfast boo moo  outside 

Monday clumsy boy day broke my toy day 
Tuesday sad lost Wednesday tough kot sit Thursday run dropped
Friday horrid lip spilt full grit
Saturday an awful mad 
closing surprise 
good happy lovely nice great brilliant
best funny pink boy end grit bun sick sheet toy smell me my the to 
believe real happen space home everywhere swimming riding skating climbing flying because jigaree have
horns wings legs
draw special zoom very soon trip board rocket ship blast off adventure 
upside down 
how where who rocky moon stars light plane castle 
catch watch think morning water beach felt climbed wanted tried fish shape grab saw
flowe fish light star ship burst 
what when why 
models toys puppet toys left out garden 
resourceful horse brave sheep small clever strong cowboy thoughtful Dinosaur 
helpful wind up robot 
wonder doll 
sun went down bigger
realised actually spaceship opened up a bright hole and beamed monster bits  
         
