Playing with friends
Look at these pictures of children racing.
We are in swimming race. We are in running race. We are in bike race.
Do you like to race?
What do you get if you win a race?  
Read this story. It is about friends. They have a race. The Bike race

Read each question. Look at each picture. Say each answer then write it in your notebook.
Very fast, racing to choose an action word. Act it out. Can the class guess what are you doing?
He is reading, retell, 
Let's ride to the big tree and have a race.
Here I come ! pull Hide and seek Tug of war. 
I can go faster than you. 
Where shall I pin it?   
Draw or write about your favourite game.
Does dragon hide?
under in on
I can make a hat. I can make a model. I can make a game. We can make a den. 
What do you think they make?   
In the beginning, middle, end. 
first, then, next at the end. Point to your eye, arm, leg, head, mouth, body.
Now you draw a robot in your notebook. Label the path. Let's make a dragon. What do you need?
I need boxes and
Stick the bits on. Paint a face.
Write what you do. 
belongs to. 
Finding out and making
They have labels. Do your clothes have labels? why? 
Labels tell us what something is, or who it belongs to.     
Capital letter, next page, classroom, door, desk, board, display,  window, books, pens, chair, sink, clock, paints, computer,  jug. 
Grass, leaves, soil, bark 
Draw them in your notebook and write label.
Signs, feeling, signs, guess, zoo, wait, telling, goodbye, stop, surprised, danger, closed, people, really notice English alphabet, color, paint brush fingers wearing, Stand up Hop Jump red blue pink instruction colors orange, blue purple mix up yellow 
wash your hands numbers wrong right order needed something cooking 
jug sugar egg apron spoon baking powder flour bowl milk choc-chips 
Bake muffins put oven heading label instruction pour crack add cherries jump in the bowl pretend 

rhyme time
lie to sing any 
Theo thumb THeo thumb where are you?
Pablo Pointer 
Tabby tall repeat 
one two three four five six seven eight nine ten bun shoe 
buckle sticks lay them straight big fat hen 
bet tongue knee floor dive build with bricks bang the gate walk in a line start again short word snap 

little monkeys swinging in a tree
chasing fuzzy bees 
playing in a swing
digging with a spade
fluffy cats
wearing fun ghats

cuddling with their teds
sleeping in their beds act out bats
fire behind the  rocks 
put out 
no bucket have
says pear 
water fine howl
lost your towel 
feeling chilly 
swim
take a jump and hold your nose
don't look grim grumpy gone all humpy dip buy some biscuits
Mind slippy trouble lo 
trouble so aloud skate, ski, attack, dive, win, kick review 
back black crack pack track 
sack back black crack pack track 
letters similar spelling word web ring except one
time climb rain
bee cow sea tea me
no so low big toe
by my tie she why  






ts of bubbles 
deary me


 
Let’s ride to the big tree,” sags Hedgehog. “Yes. Let’s have a race!” sag Dragon and Bear.“Get set  GO!” sags Hedgehog. Dragon and Bear go very fast.
Wait for me!” says Hedgehog. Dragon and Bear go very fast down a hill. Hedgehog rolls into a ball. He rolls down the hill.
'“i am the winner!” cheers Hedgehog.
Dragon is riding his bike. Let's ride to the big tree. Let's have a race. 
"Let's play Hide and Seek," says Hedgehog. Dragon counts. Hedgehog hides. ' “ Here I come! ” says Dragon. Dragon looks in the boxes. “Where are you?” Dragon looks under the boxes. Dragon sneezes. My turn now. “ There you are! ” says Dragon.
I can make a hat. We can make a den. I can make a model. "What can we make?" says Bear. "Let's make a robot," says Hedgehog. Hedgehog makes the robot's body. Bear makes the robot's head. Hedgehog makes the robot's arm. Bear gets some paint. He paints the robot's mouth. "Hello", says the robot. "It's me!" says Hedgehog.  
