Young-sup and his brother Kee-sup have discovered that coating a kite’s line with broken pottery and glue makes it faster at cutting other kites’ lines. As they were busy congratulating each other, Young-sup had a sudden, sobering thought.  “Brother. What if it’s against the rules?"  "Against the rules?" Kee-sup stopped in his tracks. “I never thought of that. You mean, maybe someone has thought of this before and it’s not allowed.” “We could ask." "But if we ask another ﬂier, and no one has thought of it before, maybe he’ll steal our idea." They stared at each other, their faces reﬂections of worry.

“Honorable Sir!" Kite Seller Chung lifted his head. He was just leaving the marketplace after a busy day. Young-sup rushed up to him, panting from his run, and bowed politely if hurriedly. The old kite seller smiled at his eagerness. “What demon chases you, young ﬂier?” he teased. "No demon, sir — just a question.”  “A question for me, I take it.”  Young-sup looked around them. The market was closing for the day, with many people brushing past them in a hurry to make last-minute purchases. He bowed again to the old man. "I do not wish to delay you, sir. Perhaps we could talk as I walk beside you.”  The old man cocked his head curiously and gestured his assent. They set out on the road away from the market and walked in silence until the crowds around them had thinned somewhat. “Now, young ﬂier. What is this question, the answer to which you believe I hold?” “It’s about the kite festival, sir. About the competition."  “Ah — the kite ﬁghts.” The old man’s eyes Lit up with keen interest. “Yes, sir. It is said that there is little you do not know about them." The kite seller nodded. “True enough. I have been watching them every year now for more than half a hundred years.” “Then you would know, sir, about the rules." Young-sup paused, his voice low and urgent. “My brother has a new invention. We wish to use it at the ﬁghts, but we need to know if using it would be honorable — within the rules.” His companion frowned. “That is not one question, young ﬂier, but two.
Tell me about this invention.”

It was a little enough thing that began it. It happened during the siesta. Antonito was bored. He was just messing around, as children do. All he did was kick a football through a window, by accident. When his mother came storming out into the garden, Antonito was standing there in his Barcelona shirt, looking as guilty as sin. He hadn’t run off — he’s not like that. There was no one else around except the cat and me, and we were having our afternoon nap under the mimosa tree at the bottom of the garden, well away from the scene of the crime. So, Antonito had to be the culprit. He was for it, and there was nothing I could do to help him.
“Antonito! How many times have I told you?” I could see that chin of his was jutting already and I knew there’d be tears welling up inside him. I could sense what he was going to say before he even said it. “I didn’t do it. It wasn’t me. Honest." And it was all said with such utter conviction, such determined deﬁance. Asked for an alternative explanation, he shrugged insolently at his mother, pursed his lips and refused to speak. Antonito is banished to his bedroom as punishment. Later, when his grandfather, Abuelo, talks to him about what he saw happen, Antonito asks him some difﬁcult questions. "Abuelo, when you were little, did you ever do bad things? I mean, really bad. Did you ever tell a lie?" "Abuelo, when you were little, what was the very worstest thing you ever did?”

Prayers were said this morning at the primary school in Tiverton for Robbie Ainsley who was knocked down by a car last week. Head teacher Mrs Tinsley said, “Robbie is  a very popular boy at school with children and teachers alike. He plays centre forward in the school football team, sings in the choir, and only recently played Oliver Twist in our school production of Oliver.” Robbie Ainsley remains in a coma and on a life support system in Wonford Hospital where doctors say his condition is unchanged.
“Hi, Rob. We played St Jude’s on Saturday, and we won, of course. We hammered them 4 — 1. The goal they got was a penalty, which wasn’t fair — I never touched  their centre forward. He dived. Get better soon because we miss having you around. And we need you back in the team, too. See ya." “Hiya Robbie. It’s Lauren. I’m the new girl who sits in the back and has coloured braids in her hair. You are to get better soon, because we all get very sad when we think of you in hospital. Bye for now.”  “Robbie, it’s your Checkmate, Morris." Morris, a real bofﬁn, the school chess champion — looks like Harry Potter — brain like a computer. I only ever beat him once, and then I cheated. Bit of a weirdo. He’s always making jokes, and then explaining them as if you’re Stupid or something. He’s doing it now. "Checkmate.  Checkmate. Get it? Checkmate. Come back soon, so’s I can Checkmate you again. Right?”

“Hey Robbie. This is Barry. Remember me?” Not likely to forget you, am I? Barry being friendly? Barry being nice? “Listen, I just want to say get better, that’s all. When you come back we could be mates, yeah?” And he sounds as if he really means it, too. Maybe he’s not as bad as I thought after all.  “This is Freya. Can you hear me, Robbie?" That is Freya Porter, who is very quiet and always wears those mules — sort of clog-type shoes. I think her mother’s Dutch. She speaks with a bit of an accent, but she’s better at spelling than any of us.
"Imran here, Robbie." Bill Sykes in Oliver Twist. “You’ve got to open your eyes and do stuff, because if you don’t, you won’t get to be in our next show. I just came back from my holiday in Spain when I heard about your accident, and my mum and my dad and me hope you get better very soon.”  Then Sam. Then Iuliet. Then Ioe. All of them. Everyone in my class. I just want to jump out of this bed, run down the road, across the playground, into the classroom and shout out: “Here I am! I’m back! I’m better!" But all I can do is lie here and cry inside.

jargon slang colloquial idiom dilemma vocabulary brawl conflict 
