
"Has Great Uncle George left Harry something?” asked Mrs Holdsworth. "Yes, he has.” "His fortune? ” cried Harry. "His fortune?” said his father.

"No such luck, Harry. The old boy didn’t have a lot of money, and what he did have he’s left to his university library. No, he’s left you what appears to have been his most cherished possession.” "What’s that?” said Harry. "His parrot.”

For Mad is not just a chatty beak. He is an ace at crosswords and board games, especially Monopoly, a fund of useful information and a natural mimic —  he can impersonate all the family with ease.
Even Harry’s homework improves under Mad’s expert —  and interesting — tuition and soon the whole family is wondering what they ever did without him. Unfortunately, they are about to  ﬁnd out.

Having a Grey African parrot foisted upon him all the way Mad from America isn’t Harry’s idea of a decent legacy.
He’d been dreaming of untold riches and then all he got was this boring old parrot! But when Madison introduces himself in perfect American, Harry discovers that the parrot has hidden talents.


Harry took a deep breath. A hundred times, he said to himself, I’ll say it a hundred times. He leant forward till his lips were almost against the wire bars of the cage, as close as possible to where he thought the bird’s ear must be, and, speaking slowly and clearly, as you would to a foreigner or someone rather deaf, he said, “My  name  is  Madison." The parrot scratched the side of his bare, scaly face with one foot. “If you say so, buddy," he said clearly, “but that would be a remarkable coincidence. Seeing thatmy name is Madison also.” Harry’s mouth fell open. He felt amazement, embarrassment, wild excitement, all at the same time. "What’s the matter?” said Madison Pleasantly. “Cat got your tongue?” "You can talk? " said Harry at last in a kind of hoarse whisper. Sure. Mebbe a mite differently from you, seeing I was raised in America, but boy, I sure can talk." “But ... I thought parrots could only say a few words." “Depends on how well they’ve been taught. I've spent all my life with a professor of linguistics. Dead now, but what a guy!” “Great Uncle Gearge!" “George Holdsworth was your great-uncle? You’re a Holdsworth?” "Yes. He left you to me. In his will." “Gee!” he said. “That explains it all. They shoved me in that box, drove me to the airport, and next thing I know, I’m at Heathrow. Madison Holdsworth, I said to myself, it’s London Zoo for you, I guess. Instead of which I’m back with the family. Boy, am I glad to be here!"


Do you think I would ever be able to learn the language of the animals?" I asked, laying the plate upon the hearth. “Well, it all depends," said Polynesia. “Are you clever at lessons?" “I don’t know,” I answered, feeling rather ashamed. “You see, I’ve never been to school. My father is too poor to send me.” “Well,” said the parrot, “I don’t suppose you have really missed much to judge from what I have seen of school-boys. But listen: are you a good noticer? Do you notice things well? I mean, for instance, supposing you saw two cock-starlings on an apple-tree, and you only took one good look at them — would you be able to tell one from the other if you saw them again the next day?" “I don’t know, ” I said. “I’ve never tried.”

“Well that, ” said Polynesia, brushing some crumbs off the corner of the table with her left foot, “that is what you call powers of observation — noticing the small things about birds and animals: the way they walk and move their heads and ﬂip their wings; the way they sniff the air and twitch their whiskers and wiggle their tails. You have to notice all those little things if you want to learn animal language. For you see, lots of the animals hardly talk at all with their tongues; they use their breath or their tails or their feet instead.


That is because many of them, in the olden days when lions and tigers were more plentiful, were afraid to make a noise for fear the savage creatures heard them. Birds, of course, didn’t care; for they always had wings to ﬂy away with. But that is the first thing to remember: being agood noticer is terribly important in learning animal language."

“It sounds pretty hard," I said. “You’ll have to be very patient," said Polynesia. "It takes a long time to say evena few words properly. But if you come here often I’ll give you a few lessons myself. And once you get started you’ll be surprised how fast you get on. It would indeed be a good thing if you could learn. Because then you could do some of the work for the Doctor — I mean the easier work, like bandaging and giving pills. Yes, yes, that’s a good idea of mine. ’Twould be a great thing if the poor man could get some help — and some rest. It is a scandal the way he works. I see no reason why you shouldn’t be able to help him a great deal — that is, if you are really interested in animals.” "Oh, I’d love that!” I cried. “Do you think the Doctor would let me?”


imagine blurb advertisement review quote read uncle comment fortune university library cherished possession foisted legacy perfect ace crooswords monopoly fund useful mimic impersoante expert extract accent accurately script appropriate cage journey belonging cobbler  

