Marty tried to save us. "Remember the last educational hobby? The art classes? I was sick for days.” “That was your own fault," said Mum. “I only had a drink of water." “You are not supposed to drink the water that people use to wash their brushes." Dad was thinking. “What about the library?” he said ﬁnally. “What about it?” I said, trying to sound casual, but my stomach was churning. “You both could join. Reading. It’s perfect. How can you cause trouble reading a book?” “And it’s educational," added Mum. “Yes, of course, it’s educational too,” Dad agreed. “How is it educational?" I asked, terriﬁed by the idea. “I’d much rather be outside riding a horse than inside reading about one." My mother tousled my hair. “Because, Will, sometimes the only horse you can ride is the one in your head.” I had no idea what that meant. “Don’t make us join the library," Marty begged. “It’s too dangerous." “Dangerous? How could a library be dangerous?” Dad asked. "It’s not the library," Marty whispered. “It’s the librarian." “Mrs Murphy?” said Mum. “She’s a lovely old lady.”

The problem with grown-ups is that they only see what’s on the outside. But kids know the real truth. People forget to be on their best behaviour around kids, because nobody believes a word we say. Every kid in our town knew about Mrs Murphy. She was one of those people that kids steer clear of.
“She’s not a lovely old lady, " I said. “She’s a total nut.” “Will! That’s a terrible thing to say." “But she is, Mum. She hates kids and she used to be a tracker in the army. Tracking kids from enemy countries." “Now you’re being ridiculous.” “She has a spud gun under her desk,” added Marty. “A gas—powered one that takes an entire potato in the barrel. She shoots kids with it if they make a noise in the library. That’s why we call her Spud Murphy.” My mother thought this was all very funny. “A spud gun! You’ll say anything to avoid reading a book."


Far away from here, following the Jade River, there was once a black mountain that cut into the sky like a jagged piece of rough metal. The villagers called it Fruitless Mountain because nothing grew on it and birds and animals did not rest there.

Crowded in the corner of where Fruitless Mountain and the Jade River met was a Village that was a shade of faded brown. This was because the land around the Village was hard and poor. To coax rice out of the stubborn land, the ﬁelds had to be ﬂooded with water. The villagers had to m tramp in the mud, bending and stooping and planting day after day. Working in the mud so much made it spread everywhere and the hot sun dried it onto their clothes and hair and homes. Over time, everything in the village had become the dull color of dried mud. One of the houses in this village was so small that its wood boards, held together by the roof, made one think of a bunch of matches tied with a piece of twine. Inside, there was barely enough room for three people to sit around the table — which was lucky because only three people lived there. One of them was a young girl called Minli.
Minli was not brown and dull like the rest of the village. She had glossy blackhair with pink cheeks, shining eyes always eager for adventure, and a fast smile that ﬂashed from her face. When people saw her lively and impulsive spirit, they thought her name, which meant quick thinking, suited her well. “Too well,” her mother sighed, as Minli had a habit of quick acting as well.

Ma sighed a great deal, an impatient noise usually accompanied with a frown at their rough clothes, rundown house, or meager food. Minli could not remember a time when Ma did not sigh; it often made Minli wish she had been called a name that meant gold or fortune instead. Because Minli and her parents, like the village and the land around them, were very poor. They were barely able to harvest enough rice to feed themselves, and the only money in the house was two old copper coins that sat in a blue rice bowl with a white rabbit painted on it. The coins and the bowl belonged to Minli; they had been given to her when she was a baby, and she had had them for as long as she could remember. What kept Minli from becoming dull and brown like the rest of the Village were the stories her father told her every night at dinner. She glowed with such wonder and excitement that even Ma would smile, though she would shakeher head at the same time. Ba seemed to drop his gray and work weariness — his black eyes sparkled like raindrops in the sun when he began a story. "Ba, tell me the story about Fruitless Mountain again,” Minli would say as her mother spooned their plain rice into bowls. “Tell me again why nothing grows on it.” “Ah,” Minli’s father said, "you’ve heard this so many times. You know.” “Tell me again, Ba,” Minli begged. “Please.” “Okay,” he said, and as he set down his chopsticks his smile twinkled in a way that Minli loved.


Nothing grows or lives on the Fruitiess Mountain, making life hard for the local villagers. Unlike her neighbours, Minli is undaunted by the daily toil and drudgery of life squelching through mud to eke out a living. Inspired by her father’s stories of the Jade Dragon and the Old Man in the Moon, who knows the answers to all of life’s questions, Minli determines to change her family’s fortune. But fortunes are not so easily changed — at least not in the way that Minli imagines. Armed with chopsticks, rice bowl and instructions from a recently purchased goldfish, Minli follows her faith that her father’s stories are more than fantasy —sure that the Man in the Moon, if she can find his home on the Never Ending Mountain, will fantasy beyond her father’s tales; but when she finally reaches her destination, how will she know which question to ask?


author storyline sequence sloving real imaginary tale yarn legend myth fable account ancecdote account narrative chronicles synonyms braille blind genre comment unlikely unexpected meagre thesaurus 
fruitless local villagers undaunted daily toil drudgery life squelching through mud eke living inspired determines armed chopsticks rice purchased goldfish faith fantasy sure never finding ending aid tearful encounters destination volunteers 

