Assessment ofyour writing skills comprises two parts in the Cambridge examinations,
namely Directed Writing and Composition.

Being able to express yourself and yourthoughts fluently and precisely in written English

is a valuable skill that is fundamental to everyone’s life and is one that you will need to
practise in a wide range of contexts, such as writing letters to support applications for

jobs orfor university places, reports for information and discussion and even to fulfil your
ambition to make your fortune by writing the bestselling novel that is deep inside you.
Communicating your ideas in writing, as you are well aware, is also an integral requirement
of many ofthe subjects that you are studying in school.

No matter what the purpose ofyour writing, it is important at all times to keep the
audience for whom you are writing clearly in mind and to ask yourself questions such as,
‘Will what/ am writing be understood by the people who will be reading it?,’ ‘Have / chosen
the mostsuitable words to convey exactly what / mean?’ etc.etc.

The writing tasks in the Cambridge 0 Level English Language syllabus teach you skills
on how well you can conveyclearly to a reader your ideas on and understanding ofa
particulartopic through careful choice ofvocabulary, accuracy ofspelling, punctuation
and grammar and your ability to structure and organise your ideas by using paragraphs.

Paper 1 is the Writing Paper. It lasts for 1 hour and 30 minutes and in total is worth 60
marks. There are two parts to the paper and you must answer both ofthem.

l Directed Writing requires you to respond to a task relevant to the world ofstudy, work
orthe community and write, for example, a letter, speech, report or article. You are
usually expected to write about 2007300 words. Teachers will assess your work in terms
of its fitness for purpose and the quality ofvvritten expression.

2 Composition requires you to write an essay, both language (written expression) and
content being of importance here. You should write about 350—500 words on one topic
only. You are usually offered a choice offive narrative/ descriptive/argumentative essay
titles.,W 

1 Introduction to Writing

 

These two writing tasks will test your ability to ‘Communicate accurately, appropriately and
effectively in writing’. in orderto demonstrate this, you will need to develop skills as defined in
the following assessment objectives.

1 W1 Articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
2 W2 Sequence facts, ideas and opinions

3 W3 Use a range of appropriate vocabulary

4 W4 Use register appropriate to audience and context

5 W5 Make accurate use ofspelling, punctuation and grammar

You are expected to articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined.
This means that you should consciously choose words and use a range of sentence structures
and types along with appropriate literary devices, such as similes and metaphors, thatyour
readers can both understand and share your experiences, thoughts and feelings orthose ofa
character which you have created as part ofa story.

You are expected to communicate using a register appropriate to audience and context.
This means that you should adapt your language and the content ofyourwriting to meet the
requirements of the task you have been set and to appeal to the specific audience for whom
you are writing.

You are expected to sequence facts, ideas and opinions.

This means that whatevertype of essay you write you should ensure that the ideas it contains
are structured to develop logically from one point to the next by the use of planned and
linked paragraphs.

You are expected to communicate clearly, using a range of appropriate vocabulary.

This means that you should choose the words you use carefully in orderto convey your
meaning precisely; that you should structure yoursentences logically and use a range of
sentence types; that you should organise your work into paragraphs and that there should be
a focused and consistent development of ideas from beginning to end.

You are expected to communicate accurately.
This will be assessed through how well you use correct Standard English spelling, grammar,
punctuation and vocabulary in particular.

—\

Time constraints

Suppose you are given 1 hour and 30 minutes in an examination. Duringthis time you must
plan and write two separate tasks. You should not have any serious problems with completing

both tasks in the time available but keeping the following points in mind may help you to do so
effectively.

- It is suggested thatyou write between 200~300 words for Directed Writing and between
350600 words for Composition. You should certainly not exceed the upper word limit. By
doing so, you will put yourself under unnecessary pressure. in practice, about 250 words
for Directed Writing and 450 words for Composition should be adequate.

Rememberthat the quality ofyour written English is more important than the quantity
you write.1 Introduction to Writing

in any examination, read through the question paper carefully before you start to write,
Before entering the examination room you should already have some idea ofthe type of
essay which you are most confident about writing well under examination conditions.

Rememberthat you only have one chance in an examination — do not spoil it by deciding
on a whim to attempt a type of essay with which you are not confident.

Teachers often notice that many students choose to write on a topic about which they
have very few ideas and forwhich they lack the imagination and vocabulary range required
to write convincingly. This applies particularly to those students who mistakenly choose
the narrative or argumentative topics and run out of ideas after the first two paragraphs.

Once you have decided on the title on which you will write in Composition, make sure that
you have a clear understanding of exactly what is required ofyou; many students limit their
performance by only partially following the instructions of the title and writing an essay
not on the given topic but on something only loosely connected with it.

Before starting on Directed Writing, be sure thatyou have a good understanding ofthe
topics for Composition; it is a good idea to know what the task involves so that you plan
how best to apportion your time.

Spend some time planning before you begin to write. However, do not take planning to
extremes — there is absolutely no need to write your complete essay for Composition as
a rough draft and then to re—write it more neatly; doing thisjust increases the pressure
you are under. However, you should make a plan ofthe basic structure ofyour essay and
organise this plan into paragraph topics.

It is a good idea to make sure that you know how your essay will conclude before you start
to write it.

Remember the reader; you are writing something which may be read by someone who
lives in another part ofthe world and almost certainly belongs to a different generation
and culture from yours. The more you can engage and entertain that reader, the more
successful yourwriting is likely to be.

Think about the sort of information you need to give so that the reader can understand
clearly what you are writing about; choose your words carefully to give as clear a picture of
what you are describing as you can.

You can best engage the reader by writing about something with which you are familiar;
always try to set your essay within a context or background which is or could be within
your own experience.

Try to avoid relyingtoo much on re—hashing other essays which you have done in preparing
foryourexaminations as it is very difficult to make such material fit the particulartopic on
which you are writing.

 

Standard English

The syllabus aims require you to write in Standard English and also to employ different forms
ofwriting to suit a range of purposes. Let us look at these requirements in greater detail.r"

I 1 Illlfllllllﬂtillll [0 Writing l

it is easy to misinterpret what is meant by the phrase ‘Standard English’. it is not an
instruction to write in an unnecessarily formal and overrliterary style.

However, it is important when you are producing a piece of Composition to keep in mind
the fact that the person for whom you are writing will be ofan older generation and living

in a country several thousands of miles away. This is not to say that your readers will not

be familiar with teenagers and their attitudes, but they may not be fully uprtordate with the
colloquial or dialect terms which you might use as a matter of course when speaking to your
own friends. Standard English is the use of the accepted conventions of expression and
grammatical structures which are common to speakers and writers of English of all ages
throughout the world.

\
Writing to suit a range of purposes

- You should adapt yourwriting to meet the requirements ofthe particulartask you have
chosen and use a tone and register which will be suitable for your chosen genre and the
audience for whom you are writing. You might be asked to write a letterto a friend orto
write a report of an incident foryour Headteacher; the latter requires a different format
from the former; it also requires a more formal tone in your writing as it is highly unlikely
that you would write a formal report for your Headteacher in the same relaxed style that
you would use when writing to a friend ofyour own age. Teachers are appreciative of
students who show that they have read the question carefully to adopt a tone which is
suitable fortheir purpose.

- While writing an essay, a letter, a speech, a report or anything else, you should always
remember the teachers who will be reading your work. They are likely to appreciate your
adoption of a suitable tone (for example, your use of an appropriate valediction at the end
ofa letteror your introduction of convincing personal references in the main body ofthe
letter) but will be considerably less impressed ifyou use the abbreviations suitable for text
messaging, as these are not Standard English usage.

- it is important that you adapt your tone to suit the requirements ofthe particular type of
essay that you are writing. For example, you need to consider whether writing the essay
in the first person (‘I think that . . f) is preferable to adopting a more formal or impersonal
tone (‘People think that . . 3). Again, ifyou choose to write the narrative topic, what style
of narrative are you going to produce and what typical features ofthat style will most
effectively suit the tale you are going to tell? ifyou choose a descriptive essay, should you
write a factual or impressionistic description? Whichever you choose, it is important that
you use a vocabulary which is suitable to your chosen approach and that your approach

stays consistent throughout your essay.

- Finally, remember to write legibly and present your finished work clearly and attractively.
Although yourteachers might not assess your work on the quality of your handwriting, it
is important to ensure that they can easily read what you have written. illegible words and
phrases result in the reader having only a partial understanding of what you are trying to
say and this is likely to result in your being less successful than would be the case ifyour

answers were clearly written.