9 Exercises in tact gathering

from SIIOI‘I IBXIS

We have already seen that, in an examination, you might be given a nonfiction text
and asked:

1 to identify content points,
2 reproduce these content points in a piece of formal continuous prose and

3 answersome questions which test your ability to respond to the main ideas ofthe
passage.

You will thereafter be given a fiction passage and asked to answer a variety of questions,
which will include literal comprehension, inferential comprehension, own words
questions, quotation questions, vocabulary questions and questions on writer’s craft. Do
not worry ifyou find all ofthis daunting at the moment; this book will break down the
types ofquestions and show you how to identify them and also how to answerthem.

 

A word about fiction and non-fiction

Fiction is the name we give to any writing which is narrative, i.e. a story. Fiction is not
based on fact, but rather on the results of the imagination ofthe writer. You probably
know various types, or genres, of fiction already, starting with the fairy stories which were
read to you when you were very young. There are many other genres of fiction, such as
science fiction, crime, adventure. On the other hand, non— fiction is factual, i.e. based on
facts which are true. Some ofthe non—fiction texts you have probably seen are biography,
autobiography, travel writing, books on sport, etc.

In this book you will be given a mixture offiction and non—fiction passages. The techniques
for answering each type ofquestion remain the same, whether fiction or nonrfiction.19 Exercises in tact gathering from SIIIII'I texts l

Exercise 1: Joseph and Rohit

Read the following short passage, which is fiction, school genre, and anSWer the fact gathering
questions which follow.

    

Rohit always dreaded going into the chemistry Class because Joseph intimdated him. No matter
how hard Rohit tried, his marks for class testsjust never matched up to Joseph’s. Only last WSGk .:
Rohit had spent hours on a detailed assignment given to the class by theirteacher. At home) ’ 
Rohit’s finished assignment had looked splendid, but when Joseph took his own assignment Out :
of his bag and handed it to the teacher, Rohit was dazzled by the brightness of its COlouriul from '
cover and depressed by its obvious length. The trouble was, it was difficult not to like Joseph,

lt would have been much simpler to dismiss him as the class swot, or some strange WOl’kahglic >
but, no, Joseph was great company, with a quirky sense of humour, who looked out for everyoée .
and was very thoughtfui and kind-hearted. It wasn’t his fault he was so clever.

1 Why did Rohit dread going into the chemistry class? [1]
2 Was Rohit pleased or disappointed with his assignment as soon as he had finished it
at home? [1
3 Did Rohitlike ordislike Joseph? [1
4 Write down onething about Joseph which made him a popular pupil. [1
l

5 Write down the one thing about Joseph which made people wary of Joseph.

[5 marks

Exercise 2: Anna

Read the following short passage, which is fiction, childhood genre, and answer the fact gathering
questions which follow.

The bus was aiready crowded when it arrived, and Anna and her mother barely managed to
find room to sit. Off it went, rattling along over the dirt road, until it eventually trundled to a
stop outside the market area. Anna’s mother bundled her off, eager tojoin theiostling crowds
thronging the narrow streets. They hurried by the displays of flashyjewellery spread out on the
walk—ways, with their coloured bangles, crudely fashioned rings, and roughly polished stones,

1 making for the stall selling clothing materiai. Anna’s mother quickly began sifting through their
repetitive patterns of colour, fashioning in her mind’s eye some new dress for herself, no doubt,
or a best shirt for father.

Anna, however had her mind set on the caves nearthe market. She had heard of the attractions
there; the tempting iced drinks, street musicians performing, and the fascinating puppet
shows. Up till now she had not been allowed to go on her own. For the moment, though, the
displays of luscious fruit across the road were temptation enough. She counted the coins in her
purse, and treated herself to a small bag otjuicy plums.

1 Why did Anna and her motherfind itdifficult to find aseat on the bus? [1]
2 Where were Anna and her mother going? [1]
3 Which stall were they heading for? [l]
4 What was Anna’s motherthinking of making? [1]
5 Where did Anna really want to go? [1]
6 Was Anna allowed to leave her mother at the market? [1]

l

[6 marks

Exercise 3: Modern Travel

Read the following short passage, which is nonfiction, and answer the fact gathering questions
which follow.

in the twenty~first century, ordinary people can travel more than they were ever able to do
before. One reason for this is the vast improvement in transport and communications. Jet
planes can travel from one end of the world to the other in a matter of hours.

120l 19 Exercises in iact gathering tram snort texts ‘

 

People work shorter working weeks than in the past and therefore have more leisure time,
which they often spend taking holidays to far—flung destinations, Places they would only ever
have dreamed of, or have seen in magazines or read about in books, have become accessible to
the ordinary traveller. 1

Low price airlines are a modern phenomenon; sometimes called ‘no frills’ airlines, they keep
prices down by cutting back on many of the extra services of their more expensive counterparts
- for example, a seating plan on the plane, or elaborate meals and drinks. Affluence and higher
incomes also mean that ordinary people are able to do more than feed, house, clothe and
educate their families—they are able to indulge themselves in luxuries which in the past were
reserved for the rich. One of the most appreciated of these luxuries is travel.

1 In what one way, according to the writer, is the twenty-first century different from
those which went before? {1]
2 Why do people nowadays have more leisure time than in the past? [1]
3 What is different about the destinations of the modern traveller compared to the .
destinations oftravellers in the past? [1]
4 How do‘no frills’ airlines keep their prices down? [1]
5 Why are ordinary people nowadays able to have luxuries which were not available
to ordinary people in the past? [1]
6 What, according to the writer, is one ofthe most appreciated luxuries available to
ordinary people nowadays? [1]
{6 marks]

Exercise 4: A Bad Day

Read the following short passage, which is fiction, school genre, and answer the questions
which follow.

The day had started off badly for Rahrnan. Firstly, his alarm clock had not rung because,

he realised later, the battery needed to be replaced. When he got up, late of course, he
remembered that he had forgotten to pack his schoolbag the night before. How often his
mother had told him to be well prepared for school by having an organised bag sitting at the
front door. He scrambled around frantically, picking up notebooks, textbook and pencils and
dashed out for the school bus. As he reached the bus stop, he wasjust in time to see the school
bus drive off in a cloud of exhaust fumes. Feeling very sorry for himself, and feeling hunger
pangs because he had not had time for breakfast, he felt like crying, although tears were, he
thought, hardly appropriate for a boy of his age.

121122

 19 EXEI‘GISGS Ill tact gathering ll’ﬂlll SIIIII'I IEXIS l
H '

Chm-waH

Exercise 5: The Intruder

Read the following short passage, which is fiction, crime genre, and answer the fact gathering
questions which follow.

Why did Rahman not wake in time for school?

What advice had Rahman’s mother often given him?

How did Rahman normally get to school?

What went wrong with his travel arrangements on this particular day?
Apart from feeling sorry for himself, why does Rahman feel like crying?
Why does he think he should stop himself from crying?

   

He stood in the dark, at the edge of the quiet street, ready to walk quickly away if anyone
passed by who might later be able to identify him. He was dressed in a nondescript way w
blackjogging trousers, baggy black sweater w and he had been careful to shield his eyes with
a baseball cap. He would be difficult to identify, all right, although the chances of that ever
becoming an issue were slim in this deserted part of town. He pulled himself back further
into the shadows as the front door of the house, the house he had been watching for weeks,
opened and the owner, a dark haired, rather burly man ofabout forty, heid reckoned, came
out and got into his parked car. As the car drove away, he smiled to himself.

This was his moment. The rest ofthe inhabitants of the house —~ the mother and the two
children whom she took out every Tuesday — had already left. That meant that the house was
empty. it was up to him now to avail himselfoi this opportunity, and make his move. Having
checked that no—one was around, he walked briskly in the front gate and round to the back
garden, where his bag of tools, including a crowbar, had already been hidden. He grinned to
himself, pleased that his weeks ofplanning and surveillance were about to be rewarded. ‘How

smart i am!’ he smiled to himself, as he removed the crowbar from the bag.

What is the character in the story planning to do? [1]
Why would he walk quickly away if anyone passed by? [1]
Write down one ofthe things he did to make sure he would be difficult to identify. [1]
Why was the matter of identification not likely to become an issue? [1]
How many people lived in the house? [1]
Who left the house first? [1]
On what day of the week does the story take place? [1]
What had he already hidden in the garden? [1]

[8 marks]