The Directed Writing task (sometimes referred to as Transactional Writing) differs from the
Composition tasks as teachers look for evidence that you have read the information given in
the question carefully besides assessing you for your writing skills. As with all writing tasks, it
deals with those Assessment Objectives concerned with organisation of paragraphs, correct
use of vocabulary, grammar, punctuation, spelling and the use of Standard English. in
particular, however, it focuses on all ofthe following Assessment Objectives.

1 Articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined.
2 Sequence facts, ideas and opinions.

3 Use a range of appropriate vocabulary.

4 Use register appropriate to audience and context.

5 Make accurate use of spelling, punctuation and grammar.

Task Fulfilment is an important consideration for assessing yourwork in Directed Writing.
This means thatyou will be assessed on how well you:

- show an understanding ofthe purpose ofthe task

- show how clearly you are aware ofthe situation that you have to describe and the
audience forwhom you are writing

- show an appropriate use of the format in which you have been instructed to write
- develop and organise all three points that you are required to include in your answer
- can give youropinion andjustify it

adopt a tone and register entirely appropriate to the task.

As mentioned here, all Directed Writingtasks will contain three content points that you
must include in your answer; at least one ofthese will require you tojustify your personal
opinion about the topic concerned orto make an interpretation ofthe information given
in the task. It is important that you elaborate appropriately on the content points in your
answer~ it is not enough simply to mention them in passing.

649 Directed writing

Here is an example of a typical Directed Writing task.

Your local youth group has arranged a campingtrip for its members.

As Secretary of the group, you have to write a letter to the parents of all those wishing
to go on the trip informing them of the arrangements involved.

As some parents may be concerned about the safety oftheir sons/daughters, you
should, in your letter, attempt to reassure them ofthe precautions which are in place.

include in your letterthe following information:
- when and where the trip willtal<e place
- cost ofthe trip/travel arrangements

- the activities involved and the measures taken to ensure the safety ofthose
participating in the trip. Begin your letter, ‘Dear Parent 

 

Now let us consider more closely what this task involves.
- You have been given a situation (the camping trip), a character or persona in which to write
(secretary of a youth group), an audience to address (parents) and a genre (a letter).

- You have been given three specific points of detail to include in your letter.
- It is important that the letteryou write is fit for purpose.
- The tone and register you use are, therefore, particularly important.

- Your approach should be friendly but not too informal. You should try both to encourage
parents to let their children take part in the trip and to reassure them ofthe safety
aspects involved.

- The information concerning details oithe trip should be given clearly and unambiguously.

- You have been told how to begin the letter; there is no need to put your address at the top
although you may want to make up a contact telephone numberto include in the letter at
an appropriate point.

- You should plan the order ofyour paragraphs carefully to ensure that all points are clearly
communicated in a logical and reader—friendly way.

- Ofthe three points which must be included some, such as the cost and dates ofthe trip,
must be stated clearly and comprehensively; information about the activities involved and
the safety precautions will need some suitable elaboration in order to convince parents
that their children will be safe.

- The opening and concluding paragraphs are particularly important in establishing an
appropriate tone foryour letter.

- Rememberthat your letter requires a suitable valediction (Yours sincerely) and you should
include your position (Secretary) afteryoursignature.

Exercise 1

Now, plan and write your letter, using the notes above..

9 nirectell writing l

Forms and purposes -
Although only one Directed Writing task might be set each year in examinations, over a

period of years, different forms ofwriting and different purposes for writing might be tested.
It is important that you become familiar with the requirements needed for each ofthe main

forms of writing that may occur. These are: letters, speeches/talks, reports, accounts and
newspaper/magazine articles.

Letters

Letters may be either formal or informal. For example, you may be required to write a
letterto a magazine or a newspaper; to a company ororganisation asking for information
orcomplaining about something; to a friend or acquaintance asking fortheirsupport in a
venture you are undertaking or apologising forsomething which happened.

Of the above examples, the letters to a newspaper or an organisation are likely to be formal
and the letter to a relative or acquaintance will be informal.

As a general rule, ifyou begin your letter by addressing the person to whom you are writing
by his or her position or title (for example, Dear Editor, Dear Sir/Madam) then you are using a
formal register.

However, ifyou are addressing the person by name (for example ‘Dear Mr. Miah or Dear
Rafiq’ or ‘DearAunt Urmi’), then you are writing informally. Different letter conventions apply,
depending upon which sort of letteryou are writing.

Formal letters should begin with your address and the date in the top right—hand corner of
the page and with the title and address of the person to whom you are writing on the left—
hand side ofthe page, starting below the last line ofyour address. The salutation (Dear Mr...)
should be written directly underthe last line of the recipient’s address and, ifyou have been
asked to quote a reference, this should be placed on the middle ofthe follOwing line. Your
letter should conclude with either ‘Yours faithfully’ or ‘Yours truly’ and you should sign both
yourfirst name and surname orfamily name.l 9 nirecled writing I

A formal letter will, therefore, look something like the one given below.

 

Your address
Date:
Recipient’s name and title

Recipient’s address

Dear Mr
Ref: AXGTY/2007

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Yours faithfully

 

 

 

Informal or personal letters are, by their very nature, less detailed in their layout. Again,
your address and the date should be written in the top right hand corner ofthe page but it is
not necessary to include the recipient’s address.

You should place the salutation (Dear Urmi) at the left ofthe page on the line immediately
below the date. ltyou address the person by theirtitle and name (Dear Mrs. Patel) then you
should conclude the letter with the standard valediction for a personal letter which is ‘Yours
sincerely’.

However, if you are writing to a close friend or relative, ‘Yours sincerely’ usually sounds too
stilted so you need to decide on a valediction which reflects the closeness otyour relationship
to the recipient such as ‘With love’ or ‘Yours aﬁectionately’.9 llifﬂﬂﬂll writing l

[Esq

A personal letter will, therefore, look something like the one given below.

 

Your address
Date:

Dear Urm

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Yours affectionately

 

Soraﬂa

 

 

The main difference between a formal and a personal letter will be found in the tone of
what you write. Formal letters will be more objective in tone and written in formal Standard
English; personal letters will be more colloquial with a greater use of abbreviations.

Similarly, formal letters will focus almost exclusively on the issue with which they are
concerned, whereas personal letters are likely to ask questions about the recipient’s health
and that of his or her family besides dealing with the main topic ofthe letter. However, you
should be careful not to make a personal letter so colloquial that yourteacher reading it
cannot understand what is being said.

The advice above is concerned with the format to be used when writing letters in everyday
situations; as already stated, letters set as part of Directed Writing tasks will not require you to
give details ofthe sender’s or recipient’s addresses unless such details are provided foryou in
the instructions to the question. You should, however, always include an appropriate date.

Exercise 2
Choose one of the topics below and write an appropriate letter.

1 You have recently bought an expensive piece ofelectronic equipment which has developed a
fault. Write a letter to the retailer explaining when you bought the item, what the fault is, and
asking for either a full refund or a brand new replacement for the item.

2 Write a letter to your aunt who lives in another town. You are visiting that town for the purpose
of attending an interview and you wish to ask your aunt if she could provide you with overnight
accommodation for two nights.

3 Write a letter to the Editor of a local newspaper, in which you explain why there should be more
leisure facilities provided for young people of your age group in your local area, and asking for
support from other people in your campaign for suitable facilities.9 llirectell writing

Speeches and talks

ifyou are asked to write the words of either a speech or'a talk, it is important that you show
some awareness of an oral register in your writing. A speech is generally a more formal form
ofspoken address than a talk and is likely to be aimed at a larger audience For example,

a talk may be addressed to members ofyour own class at school, whereas a speech could

be delivered as part ofa public speaking competition to an audience with whom you are
unfamiliar. in the lattercase, it would be sensible to begin your response by introducing
yourself (‘Good evening, my name is  and i am goingto speak about  whereas with the
former such an introduction would be unnecessary as your listeners would already know who
you are; in this case, your introduction could be much more low—key (Hello, everyone, you all
know me and you won’t be surprised that I am going to talkto you about

Remember, also, that both speeches and talks may require you to be persuasive or
informative, and you should ensure that the register you use is appropriate to the task.

The instructions to the task will indicate who your audience is. It is important that you keep
this audience clearly in mind while you are writing your response as teachers are likely to be
appreciative ofthe use of a tone which is appropriate to the audience.

Forexample, ifyou are addressing an audience of 16—year—old students within a school
classroom, your language is likely to be more colloquial than ifyou are addressing an
audience of local dignitaries> teachers and parents at a school speech day.

One ofthe main difficulties when writing the words of a speech or a talk is to ensure that what
you write sounds like something which is spoken but avoids being so informal in its structure
and vocabulary that it is difficult to assess as an example of Standard English.

The best approach is to ensure that you place yourwords clearly within an oral framework by
starting with a direct address to your audience and concluding in a similarway (‘Thank you
for listening to what I have had to say.’).

Once you have given yourselfthis type ofstructure, try to ensure that, at regular points
throughout your speech, you address your audience directly (through the use ofeither the
second person pronoun ‘you’ orthe inclusive first person plural ‘we’) and that you include
your audience in what you are saying by directing rhetorical questions towards them.

Much as the speech genre is a central element ofthe question, you should not concentrate
on this at the expense ofthe structure ofyour argument and the need to include the points
stated in the question.

Finally, it is not necessary to embellish what you write with stage directions such as ‘Spoken
passionately, while raising both arms in the air’; as a successful writer, you will convey emotions
and so on through well—chosen vocabulary and a suitable variety of sentence structures.

Exercise 3

You have been asked to talk to a small group ofstudents in your year group at. school about a local
tradition or ceremony which you consider to be important. In your talk you should:

- Say what the tradition or ceremony is and when and where it takes place

- Give details ofwhat the ceremony or tradition involves and why it is important to you and your
family and friends

' Say what it reveals about the life and culture of your area and why it should be preserved.V

9 Directed writing

 

 

Reports

There are two possible types of report that you may be required to write as a Directed Writing
exercise. One is a report for a newspaper or magazine giving an account of an event or an
episode; the other is a formal report written to be read by someone in authority (the Principal
of a school or the police) in which you provide information about something which you

have witnessed or in which you have assembled facts and details to support a particular
proposition (such as suggestions for redesigning a student common room).

Whichever type of report you write, it is important that you organise your response carefully,
You must ensure that the facts you are communicating are followed easily by the reader.
You should keep the audience foryour report in mind at all times and write using a register
appropriate to that person’s position.

Rememberthat, with a formal report, the person for whom you are writing is likely to be busy
and will not, therefore, appreciate something that is too full ofdigressions and unnecessary
description and does not convey the facts directly.

As a general rule, you should include a main heading at the start ofyour report (‘Proposals for
Redesigning the Students’ Common Room’). Each paragraph should contain one key point,
and the topic sentence should clearly state what this is and point the way forward.

At the end ofthe report there should be a business—like summing up ofthe main points with a
suggestion as to the next stages to be considered if the task requires this.

lfyou are asked to write a report for a newspaper or magazine, then certain specific features
need to be considered. One ofthese is that it may be necessary to make the report more
immediate or dramatic than would be the case with a formal report. it is important to keep
the purpose ofyour report clearly in your mind and make sure that you avoid the temptation
to drift into a narrative style. For example, ifyou are required to write a report forthe police,

. giving details of a robbery at your house, then make sure that you focus clearly on the facts

— for example, the time when you discovered that it had occurred; how long you had been
away from home, etc. There is no need, however, to go into details ofwhat you did while you
were away because, however interesting it might be to you, it is unlikely to help the police
solve the crimel

Newspaper reports, in particular, should start with a headline which will prepare the reader
for both the facts and the tone of what follows. They may also contain statements given by
other people who were present at the incident being reported. These statements can be
written either as reported speech or included in your report as direct quotations (in which
case it is, of course, important that you punctuate them correctly as direct speech).

Exercise 4

An incident occurred in your English lesson the other day. Your teacher had had to leave the room
on urgent business and while she was gone. a window was accidentally broken. As the class
representative, you have been asked by the Principal to submit a formal written report explaining
what happened. Your report should include the following details:

why the teacher had to leave the room and who had been left in charge
what happened/who was involved

whether anyone was at fault.9 Ilirecteu writin i
l

‘ l

 

 

Examples of Directed Writing responses

Here are two sample responses to the same task. Read through each carefully and discuss its
strengths and weaknesses with a partner. in particular, make notes on how well the writers
have dealt with the following features:

- layout - arrangementofideas
- tone ~ suitabilityofsalutationandvalediction

- treatment of required details

Exercise 5

You have been chosen to represent your school in a general knowledge competition. You must
choose one friend to be in your team. Write a letter to your friend inviting him or her to be in your
team. You must include the following points.

when and where the competition will take place and prizes involved

- a request to your friend tojoin you in the team and why you think your friend is the best choice
for yourteam

o what preparation you should both do.
Adapted from Cambridge 0 Level English Language 1120 Pope/‘1 Part Two, i’\/ovember)0()5

You must cover all three points in detail. You may also add further details if you wish. Make your
letter friendly and enthusiastic. Start with ‘Dear ...’.

Letter 1

 

DWIWW

ItWWaWyWWWIWWwMyMMWWQ/m. 
Imwmtoym, tonymWWekngwMWanWl
WWymWIcWWMtqge’l-heﬂ [am wmymtobmmfmtfmtwm
Wfa/ceyefmwﬁwvﬁde.

Weymmdlwfamedmﬁmfmr
 Wwwefﬂimwﬂéehddm 76thNoveMev2007wﬁéc/LjWM/r
aWtoﬂWeﬁrt/Lewmfdﬁm.

Injmmlzmpa/Mim, WOWMIWW Mrr. Chat/lei, hazy/Wed W
WtoWWWjWMW. WWWWMWWWWVWW
Meta/canto  wﬂhrﬂWMyM
 Wytmdmrk 

IWWymthhemeﬁrﬁwfﬂwkwwﬂLt/wwwkmﬁm. 775w
WdfﬂukWWmWWtohW/Mmptﬂwm. 
WWWWt/wee Wartowzwﬁrmrdwvi. 
mmwmtoéemedmﬁmwwwrtWMt/wrm

[WWQ/WWyouMet/wbwtfwm tojMawteamWﬁdﬁvaa/vtw.
YWWMWWqWW¢WmWWtWtohMW.PW
rWanMmetonmff’ch/wm.

YWrt—rué/

from)!9 nirected writing l

Letter 2

 

Dear Wash

Hows hﬂ' with you? / hope everything is ﬁne. P/easeyive my regards to the rest ofﬂour
ﬂimi/y. 74$ / have a/reaa’u to/c/you, / have heen named captain of the team which wi//
represent our schoo/ in the ﬁrthcoming genera/ know/eoiae competition organ/sect ha the
Rotary C/uh. The competition w/i/ take p/ace on the 25 Novemher during the summer

ho/ia’ays so it does not c/ash with our end—oﬂymr examinations. The Rotary C/uh has
a/reacta reserved the Ewn Ha//ﬂ)r the occasion.

The team consists of three memhers and / won/d hey/adyou wou/d he one of them. /
have a/reaztu asked Leena and she agrees with me that / shou/d invite you to Join us.
/ sincereia hope that you wi// as I'm wok/naﬁrwarct to working with you.

/ he/ieveyou are the hest choice for our team hecause / know you trave/ahroad quite

ﬂeauen t/y. / 'm sure your vast experience offoreian countries wi// he an important cataiust

in our success. / a/so chose you as you have heen /earninﬂ Bio/oﬂy, a suhject which neither

Leena nor / has studied

lﬁuou agree to ﬁrm part of our team, please make a //st and /earn everythingyou

can ahout important towns and cities ahroaei /ike Lone/on, Parts, New York etc. Leena Is

studying as much history as she can of a// the p/aces she can think of I have taken up

researching c/etalis ofce/ehrities ano/ mty'or sporting achievements. / know our teamwork

wi// he centra/ to our success.

The winners of the competition wi// each receive a cheque/[or 5000 rupees and a week
/onﬂ ho/iotay to a top hote/ in Mauritius with a//e}rpensespaiet I wi// he thr/i/ec/ you
accept this request. P/ease rep/a as soon as possIh/e; / must stop now or /'// miss the post.

Best regards Sarwan

 

 

 

Both ofthese responses cover all the required points for inclusion but the second is a more
successful response for various reasons. It is better organised; it has a more consistently
persuasive tone and it develops details relating, in particular, to the preparation for the task

in a more convincing manner. Whereas, the first answer contains an inappropriate valediction
(‘Yours truly’), the second uses a more suitable formula for a letter to a friend (‘Best regards’). It

should also be noted that the written expression of Letter 1 is less accurate than that of Letter 2.

Finally, here is a selection of Directed Writing tasks similar to those that you might
come across in examinations. Choose one and write between 200 and 300 words.

Exercise 6

Your school/college has been left a significant sum of money in the will of a former pupil. it is

stipulated that this money should be used to provide a facility which the school does not at present
possess.

Your Head Teacher/Principal has asked students for written suggestions as to how this money can
be best used.9 Ilirectell writing

Write a letter to the Head Teacher/Principal. You must include the following information:
- the amount of money involved and what it should be spent on

- a description of the new facility and what it should involve

- the ways in which the whole school will benefit from the new facility.

You must cover all three points in detail. You could also add further details if you wish and make
your report clear and helpful.

Exercise 7

You have recently represented your school in a nation—wide, inter—school competition. Although
you and your team did not win the competition, you reached the final rounds and found the whole
experience to be very rewarding.

Write a letter to your Uncle who lives in another country telling him about your experience in the
competition.

in your letter you should include:

- what the competition involved and where it was held

- how your team prepared forthe competition and what happened in the competition itself
- what you and your team found rewarding about the whole experience.

Cover all three points in detail. Your letter should be friendly and informative. you should begin
your letter‘Dear Uncle...’.

Exercise 8

Your school is holding a writing competition. You are asked to write an article about a person with
whom you would like to change places for a day. It could be a famous person or someone you
know. Write your article which will appear in your school magazine.

You must include the following:

- which person you would like to change places with and what you admire about that person
- what you would do on that day

o what you think you would learn from changing places with that person.

You must cover all three points in detail. You should add further details ifyou wish and make your
article lively and interesting for your fellow students.
Adapted from Cambridge 1.715 P] {Jami/l. Oct Nov 2004

Exercise 9

While shopping in your local market you witnessed a theft taking place. Although many stallholders
and customers chased, the thief was not caught. The police were called and they asked all
witnesses to write a report ofwhat they saw.

Write your report; you must include the following details:

- when and where the theft took place

‘ how the theft was carried out and a description of the thief
- why the thief escaped capture.

You must cover all three points in detail. You may add other details if you wish but make sure that
your report is focused on the episode.

Exercise 10

You havejust returned from a three—day outdoor activity camp. You have decided to write a letter
to a friend about your experiences at the camp.

Write your letter including the details below:

- who organised the camp and where and when it took place
- the activities in which you took part

- the benefits you gained from the experience.

You must cover all three points in detail. You may add further relevant details if you wish.