l 5

  

You saw in the previous chapter that some questions ask for answers which are not lifted from

the text but are to be expressed in your own words. You are to evaluate the language ofthe
passage and rercast it in language ofyour own. We will use some material you have seen already.

For each ofthe exercises which follow:

read the passage carefully twice
pick out the key words which you are being asked to re-cast in own words

find other ways of expressing the key words. You may be able to do this with a
single synonym but you are allowed to use more than one word, provided you show
understanding.

Sometimes these words will begiven in the question. Usually in an examination you will

not be required to select and retrieve these words from the text yourself, as they will be
incorporated into the question you are asked. This chapter, as with the previous chapter,
includes some questions where you are required to select and retrieve the key words yourself
before rercasting them into your own words.

Exercise 1: Man and Animals

The hunter feared and admired the animals he pursued for their strength, speed and superior
powers of sight, hearing and scent. Later this respect became a kind of worship. As man tamed
and farmed certain species, however) a relationship of mutual affection deveioped.

Souite: from i'ﬂiiiiriiﬂlﬁ or? the Form by Judy Urquhart

In your own words, explain the three reasons for man’s fear and admiration for the

animals he pursued. [3]
What happened ‘as man tamed and farmed certain species’? Answer in your own words. [3]

{6 marks]

Exercise 2: The Ruined Books

On the top shelf, the leather binding of Pappachi’s set of ‘The insect Weaith of indie? had lifted
off each book and buckled. Silverfish tunneiled through the pages) burrowing arbitrarily from
species to species} turning organised information into yellow lace.

sourrez from i/ii. Guu of Small Tiimq» by Aiuridhaii Roy

In your own words, explain what had happened to the leather binding of Pappachi’s books. [2]

The insects were ‘burrowing arbitrarily’ through the pages of the books. Explain in your
own words what this means. [2]

[4 marks]25 More exercises in ovin words uuestions l

Exercise 3: Forest Destruction

For more than four hundred years settlers and farmers have been attacking Brazil’s forests, in ‘
one way or another. They tried to snatch land for themselves from the seemingly indestruCtible w_.
jungles, but their power of recovery defeated their efforts. Nowadays, modern machinery can 1
cut down trees at an alarming speed, and the controlled burning down ofthe forests has meant ‘:
that areas larger than some whole countries have been permanently stripped bare. »
One result ofthis destruction is becoming alarmingly obvious. The forests contain an
astonishing variety of animal and plant life which is slowly but surely disappearing.

l Thejungles were ‘seemingly indestructible’. Explain in your own words what this meanS. [2]
2 in your own words, explain what the burning down has done to large areas of forests. [3] i
3 The forests contain ‘an astonishing variety’ of animal and plant life.
Explain in your own words what this means. [2]
[7 marks]

Exercise 4: How Animals Became Pets

Domestic or farm animals must be able to develop a liking for man, enjoy comfort, and accept
confinement and control. Not until about 10 000 years ago did man develop the idea of taking
animals into captivity. There was wild game in abundance, so what prompted the idea.7

it could have come naturally from his experience as a nomadic hunter. As he followed his prey
on their yearly migrations he gradually began to influence their movements and behaviour

in certain situations. Or perhaps the idea arose out ofthe keeping of young animals as pets.
Predators trying to steal food from the hunters’ camp were fed by the men and encouraged to
become part ofthe community: the predator changed into the pet.

Source: from Animals on the Fain? by Judy Urquart

1 According to the writer, domestic animals must have a liking for man and enjoy comfort.

in your own words, explain what other features are necessary. [3]

2 In your own words, explain what gradual effect man had on animals in certain situations
as he ‘followed their yearly migrations’. i3}
3 v ‘The predator changed into the pet.’ Explain in your own words what this means. {2]
[8 marks]

Exercise 5: Sharing the Earth

Today, zoologists and naturalists are alarmed by the rapid disappearance ofmany species

of wild life due to the ruthless exploitation of the land by man for his needs, resulting in the
destruction of forests and plains. These experts study animals scientifically and form societies
and pressure groups to protect them and their habitats. Conflicting attitudes need to be
reconciled if man is to continue sharing the earth in harmony with the animals.

1 According to the writer, what alarms zoologists and naturalists today?

Answer in your own words. [3]

2 Man is guilty of ‘ruthless exploitation‘. Explain in your own words what this means. [2]
3 In your own words, explain what needs to happen, according to the writer, if man is to

‘continue sharing the earth in harmony with the animals’. [3]

[8 marks]

Exercise 6: Venice
{Venice has recently been flooded and long term damage has been done to the city.)

As soon as Venice’s peril was fully realised, there were endless conferences and tours of
inspections. Plans have been drawn up to preserve Venice, but little action has followed. A
special law was passed to save the city, but not implemented. Foreign organisations collected

146and sent to ltaly great sums of money for the same purpose, but this money was taxed by the
italian government.

Governments rose and fell; committees were formed and disbanded. Scientists, technicians
and art specialists did experiments and made recommendations.

The government ignored them all. Those who had the power to save Venice were not prepared

to take responsibility for their decisions: those who were prepared to take responsibility did
not have the power.

Venice, probably in a more tragic way than anywhere else, poses a question Western society
is reluctant to face: how much of its present wealth is it prepared to sacrifice to conserve the
glories of the past?

Source: adapted from The Death of Venice by Stephen Fay and Philip Knightley

‘Venice’s peril was fully realised’. Explain in your own words what this means. 3]
Explain in your own words what happened ‘as soon as Venice’s peril was fully realised’. 4]
Although ‘a special law was passed to save the city’, why was it unsuccessful?
Answer in your own words. 1]
Explain in your own words what is meant by ‘governments rose and fell’. 2]
‘Committees were formed and disbanded’. Explain in your own words what this means. 2]
‘Scientists, technicians and art specialists did experiments and made recommendations.’
Explain in yourown words what this means. 2]
Those who ‘had power to save Venice’ failed to do so. Explain in your words why they failed. 3]
What benefits would come about if Western society sacrificed some of it wealth? 3]
[20 marks]

 

 

147