2 The different times of

Argumentative essays

An argumentative essay is one that requires you to put forward a point ofview and to
justify your reasons for holding it. You will bejudged on how effectively you present
your ideas through the ways in which they are structured and by the examples you use
to support them. it is not usually necessary to try to consider in detail both sides of any
argument but it is important thatyou develop your ideas logically in order to produce a
convincing and persuasive conclusion. It is likely thatyou will write in a formal register
although you should avoid soundingtoo pompous

 

Descriptive essays

Descriptive essays may ask you to write about a place orto describe a person or an event.
The title will almost certainly give you the opportunity to describe a place or a person that
you know well or an event which happened to you. (It is worth keeping in mind that the
readers ofyour essay are unlikely to have a close knowledge ofthe person or place that
you are describing. So the more details you can give in yourwriting, the more interest there
will be forthe person reading it.) it is likely that you will use an informal or even colloquial
approach when writing this type of essay.

Some students mistakenly think that the best way to approach this type of task is by
making up the person or place which they are describing; this is not a particularly good
idea as it increases the difficulty and pressure ofthe task. It is far betterto spend your time
thinking about choosing the most effective vocabulary and comparisons to bring alive the
very special qualities of a place or person you know well, ratherthan spending this time in
trying to imagine a place or a person who does not exist.2 "l8 lllﬂﬂl'enl W008 0i comnosltlon tasks l
\

Discursive essays

Discursive essays allow you to explore your ideas about a particular topic. They differ from
argumentative titles because you are not required to develop your ideas logically towards

a particular conclusion but instead to consider different aspects of a particular idea or
situation. Teachers usually look at how well you can considerthe implications of the points
you make and how skilfully you can relate them to the central topic about which you are
writing. You may want to adopt a formal tone and an impartial approach to the topic but it is
equally acceptable to write about it from your own personal standpoint.

—\

Personal essays

Personal essays are a mixture ofdescriptive and discursive essays that require you to write
about something which you have experienced personally. it may be something like your

first day at school or a family occasion in which you have taken part. Teachers generally
expect you to choose an actual occasion in your life and to give a true account of it. However,
a successful personal essay depends very much on how skilfully the writer selects and
organises details of the event being described; you may find that it is a good idea to re-order
details in order to make them more interesting to your reader. Rememberthat although the
situation you are writing about may be very familiarto you, it will be necessary to provide
some context forthe events so that your reader is not confused. Personal writing can produce
some very enjoyable accounts but the best are always carefully structured to achieve
maximum effect.

\‘

\ Narrative essays

which to base yourwriting or ask you to write a story based on a particular situation. Many
students choose to write a narrative essay as they think that it is an easy choice but, in fact,
it is very difficult to construct and write a convincing short story within a given period of
time. ifyou choose this topic, it is important that you have a clear understanding ofwhat
the title requires before you begin to write and that you avoid creating too involved or too
complicated a plot. Planning is very important with this type of essay as it is very easy to get
caught up in the story which you are making up and then find that you have introduced so
many interesting characters and so many twists and turns into the plot that you’ve actually
got enough material for a threervolume novel and nowhere near enough time to write it inl