3 Keri writing skills

In orderto write English confidently and accurately, it is important that you have a sound
understanding ofthe various technicalities of writing, such as the different parts ofspeech,
punctuation, spelling, grammar and usage. In orderto ensure your understanding ofthese,
the following sections contain the main details thatyou should be familiarwith. There are
also some exercises to test your understanding.

 

Parts of speech

The different words in a sentence have different functions. In orderto have a clear
understanding ofthe mechanics ofwriting, it is important to know the names ofthe
different parts ofspeech and to be aware oftheirfeatu res.

Nouns

Key terms

Nouns are naming words; they apply to the names given to persons, places orthings.

The different types of nouns are as follows:

- Common nouns: A common noun is the name of any unspecified person, place or
thing, for example girl, town, car.

- Proper nouns: A proper noun is the name given to a particular person, place or thing,
for example Leena, Mumbai, Toyota.

- Abstract nouns: An abstract noun is the name given to something intangible like an
idea, for example thought, love, happiness.

- Collective nouns: A collective noun is a single word, which describes a collection of
things or people, for example flock, team, audience, queue. There is no hard and fast
rule as to whether collective nouns should be considered grammatically as singular
or plural. However, ifthe collection ofthings is functioning as a single unit then it
should be expressed using the singular. If, however, the noun describes a collection of
individuals functioning independently, then it could be expressed using the plural.

Think ofthe difference between these two statements: The team was p/ay/ng we// and
The team were playing bad/y.3 Kev Wl'ilillﬂ skills i

Key terms

Verbs are words which
express an action or a
state of being and are
central to the structure
ofa sentence.

Verbs

For example
i The boy kicked the football.

ii The tap dripped.
iii The caterpillar become a butterfly.

In each ofthese examples the verb is the word written in italics.

In the first example, the verb ‘kicked’ is followed by the noun ‘football’, which is referred

to technically as the object ofthe verb A verb which is followed by an object is called a
transitive verb.

in the second example, there is no object in the sentence and a verb like ‘dripped’, which is
not followed by an object is, therefore, called an intransitive verb.

Finally, the verb in the third example ‘became’ expresses a state of being and not an action. in
this sentence, the subject of the verb ‘caterpillar’ and the word following it ‘butterfly’ refer to

the same thing; the word following verbs like ‘become’ is referred to as the complement of the
sentence.

A finite or main verb is a form ofverb which expresses an action or state of being, which is
complete in itself. It has tense (past, present or future) and number (singular or plural); for
example: I walked along the road. He waits for me at the corner. it is a fine day. There are no
clouds in the sky. Tomorrow will bring both sunshine and rain. All ofthese simple sentences
make complete sense and it is the form of the verb which ensures that this is so.

Another feature of a finite verb is that it can be in eitherthe active or the passive voice. in the
former, the subject of the verb performs the action (‘The dog bit the man’) whereas in the
latter, the subject suffers the action ofthe verb (‘The man was bitten by the dog’)

Not all forms ofthe verb, however, convey a complete meaning and, therefore, need to relate
to something else in the sentence. Such forms ofthe verb are known as non-finite.

The most common non—finite parts of a verb are the infinitive (to laugh; to burn etc), the
present participle (laughing; burning) and the past participle (laughed, burnt)

When used in sentences, the infinitive functions as a noun — He liked to laugh. The participles

usually function as adjectives — The laughing man fell off his chair; The burnt wood was still
smoking several hours after the fire started.

 

 

.me .Mgnwh—‘mKey terms

An adjective is a word
used to describe a noun.

Key terms

An adverb is a word
which qualifies (that is,
adds to the meaning of)
a verb, an adjective or
another adverb. Many,
but not all, adverbs end
in —ly.

3 llev writing skills

Pronouns

Key terms

A pronoun such as I, you, he, she, it, we, they, this, that, anyone, anybody etc. is a word used in
place of a noun. Use of pronouns prevents unnecessary and clumsy repetitions of nouns.

For example

‘i/i/ay and his sister went to the river to swim. When Way and his sister arrived there, l/ijay
and his sister found that the river was dried up,’

 

By using a pronoun the meaning would be more effectively expressed: ‘Vijay and his sister
went to the riverto swim. When they arrived there, they found that it was dried up.’

Adjectives

For example
The red house had a huge bedroom in which some very naughty children could be
found.

 

Adverbs

For example
i The boy finished his dinner quickly.

ii Ihad a rathersmall breakfast.
iii Thesunwasshiningverybrightly.

 

In the first example an adverb is used to qualify a verb, in the second the adverb qualifies an
adjective and in the third, one adverb qualifies another.

Prepositions

Key terms

A preposition is a word used with a following noun or pronoun to show the connection between
persons or things. Common prepositions include: about, above, across, against, along, around,
at, before, behind, beneath, beside, between, by, down, during, except, for, from, near, off, on,
over, round, since, till, towards, under, until, up, upon.iv

3 Key writing slillls J

Articles

mane  .

Key terms

The word ‘the’ is referred to as the definite article; the words ‘a’ and ‘an’ are known as indefinite
articles.

Conjunctions and interjections

Key terms For example

A conjunction is a word and, or, but, however
used to connect words

or groups of words.

 

Key terms For example

An interjection is a What! Oh! Hurray!
word used to express

a feeling such asjoy
or angerand is usually Exercise 1
indicated by the use of
an exclamation mark.

 

, , ». ~4w=+mimmm

Read the following passage and then copy and
complete the table provided by identifying the
function of each word in it.

it was raining heavily. Amrit was sitting indoors,
eating a cake and watching television. He was
bored as the television programme was dull and
uninteresting. Oh, how he wished the rain would
stop! However, the weather did not seem to upset
his younger sister, Rita; she was sitting happily

on the floor and reading a book that was full of
brightly coloured pictures.

 

   

   

   

   

Adjectives

    

Adverbs Pronouns Prepositions Conjunctions Interjections

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

WSentence types and structures

Some definitions

A phrase is a group ofwords which does not contain a finite verb. For example: ‘The dog,
lazing in the sun, seemed thoroughly content with life.’ The words in italics together comprise
a phrase beginning with a present participle and, in this case, they function together as an
adjective describing the dog.

A clause is a group of words which does contain a ﬁnite verb. There are two types of clauses:
main clauses and subordinate clauses. A main clause is a single unit ofsense and can
stand alone to make complete sense. For example: ‘Sa/im ate his breakfast.’

However, a subordinate clause does not make complete sense on its own; it is dependent on
a main clause to which it relates; for example, ‘Sa/im ate his breakfast which he had cooked
a// by himself’. In this sentence, although the subordinate clause provides further information
about Salim’s breakfast, it does not make sense unless the reader knows the content of

the preceding main clause. The word which is what is known as a relative pronoun (other
common relative pronouns are who and that) and is used tojoin two clauses together.

A main clause, therefore, can, like the example above, function as a sentence. Such a
sentence (consisting ofjust one main clause) is known as a simple sentence. A sentence
which consists of two or more main clausesjoined by a conjunction or conjunctions (‘Salim
ate his breakfast and then he lett the house and walked to school.’) is known as a compound
sentence. Finally, a sentence which contains a mixture of main and subordinate clauses
(‘Salim ate his breakfast, which he had cooked all by himself, and then left the house to go to
school which was on the other side of town.’) is known as a complex sentence.

Just as it is important to demonstrate that you are in command of a varied vocabulary, it is
equally important to show that you can use a range of sentence structures to add variety and
interest to your writing. Try to include a balance ofsimple and complex sentences so that you
avoid monotony; in general, the more involved your ideas are, the more you are likely to use
lengthy sentences. However, short sentences are often a very effective way to add emphasis
to yourwriting.

The type ofsentence structures that you use will help to determine the tone ofyour

writing. Consistently using complex sentences will create a formal tone which is suitable for
argumentative essays whereas shorter sentences might well be more effective for a narrative
essay. The ability to show control of complex sentences and structures in your writing, however,
is one ofthe criteria that teachers usually look for in writing which is ofvery good standard.3 KB! Wl'ilillﬂ skills l

Exercise 2

Combine each of the following pairs or groups of short sentences into one longer sentence You
can omit words and alter the wording where necessary. Do not rely too much on the use of simple
conjunctions such as and.

1 One afternoon l went for a stroll. The town was strangely quiet. There were very few people on
the streets. The sky was of an ominous grey colour.

2 The school is situated in the countryside. it is an old redbrick building. it is easily seen amidst
the surroundingfields.

3 Jasmine’s mother works very hard. She cooks for all the family. She goes to the market every
day. She wishes she could afford to employ a maid.

4 We were lost. We had been walking in circles for the last three hours. Every tree in'thejungle
looked the same. Night was starting to fall. It was growing dark.

5 Nissar was late leaving home. He drove his car quickly. He had a long way to travel. He had to
meet his friends at the club. He knew they would not wait there for long.

Exercise 3

Here is an episode of a story set out in note form. Tell the story in full using no more than three
paragraphs and paying particular attention to sentence building. You may include additional
details as appropriate.

Mr Patel has a bad memory — forgets important details - arranges special celebration for wife’s
birthday ~ invites many friends and family members — hires town hall for the party a employs
two top quality chefs to prepare food — books a popular band to play music ~ no expense
spared — guests due to arrive at 7.30 pm — Mr Patel and vvife arrive 7.00 — no~one else there

by 8.00 ~ Mr Patei and wife are a little worried — by 9.00 ~ no-one there apart from Mr and Mrs
Patel, the chefs and the band — Mr Patel in despair « decides to phone people ~ realises he has
left cell phone behind ~ goes home to fetch it w opens up desk to pick up phone ~ discovers
bundle of invitations n he had forgotten to post them.

To produce a good piece ofwork in Composition, it is important thatyour writing is secure in
the use ofthe main punctuation marks. Remember, the point of punctuation is to help the

reader grasp the meaning ofwhat you are writing; you cannot communicate clearly without
using punctuation accurately.

The most important punctuation marks are as follows.

Full Stop (.)
The full stop is used to indicate a long pause and to mark the end of a sentence.

Comma (,)

The comma is used to indicate a short pause; it should never be used to mark the end of a
sentence.

Semicolon (;)

123 Key writing skills

Question Mark (‘2)
The question mark is used instead of a full stop at the end of a direct question.

Exclamation Mark (l)
The exclamation mark is used instead of a full stop at the end of a sentence after making an
exclamation. It is also used after an interjection.

Apostrophe (’)
The apostrophe is used either to show possession orto indicate the omission of a letter or
letters.

Speech Marks (“ ”)
The speech marks are used to indicate direct speech.

Colon (z)
The colon is used to introduce a statement or quotation orto act as a pause or balancing
point between two balanced statements.

When punctuating a sentence never put in a stop at any place unless a pause is required in
the reading.

A guide to the use ofthe more complicated punctuation marks follows.

Full stops

A full stop is used to mark the end of a sentence. For example: ‘/t was a wet and cold morning
in the middle of/Vovember. Padma, warm and comfortable beneath the covers, did not want
to getoutofbed.’ Here there are two separate statements, each containing a main verb and
each with a different subject; it is, therefore, correct to indicate the pause between them by
usinga full stop.

A full stop is also used to indicate words that are abbreviated when the abbreviated form of
the word ends with a different letterfrom the full form ofthe word. For example: ‘3rd Sept.’

Commas

The following are the main occasions when commas should be used; the first six are purely
mechanical, the othertwo require a little more thought.

1 To separate words or phrases in a list or series (except for the last two which are usually
joined by ‘and’). For example: ‘/n the kitchen there were a large oven, pots, pans, bottles,
glasses and a stand containing cutlery.’

2 To mark off the name ortitle ofa person being spoken to. For example: ’Padma, there’s
someone at the door to seeyou.’ or ‘Excuse me, sir, you’ve/ust droppedyour wallet.’

3 To mark off words or phrases in apposition. For example: ‘The restaurant owner, Mr. Miah,
is a very rich man.’ or ‘Mr. Miah, the restaurant owner, is a very rich man.’

4 To mark off words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘therefore’, ‘by the way’,
‘nevertheless’, ‘moreover’ etc. that have been interjected into a sentence. For example: ’At
the sometime, however, you should be very careful.’

5 To mark off phrases beginning with a participle when a pause is required in the reading.
For example: ’My sister, seeing that/ was upset, asked me what was the matter.’.n

Jr...”—

3 Key writing skills l

W

6 In conjunction with speech marks to indicate the beginning ofa passage ofdirect

speech: ‘The teacherstood up and said,  A .l . 
whom’ or ‘which’ from the rest

7 To separate an adjectival clause beginning with ‘who’, ‘
ofthe sentence, when it is non-defining.

ma, but the following example will help to explain
birds, which were sitting on the wa/i, should be fed.’

This is a particularly tricky use of the com
the point: ‘The Queen ordered that d// the

 

Semicolons

Asemicolon is used tortwo main purposes.

or behind him; searched for his bicycle

in the garden and then rode ohfquick/y to find his friends.’

Colons

There are three main uses for the colon.

"ﬁn3 Kev writing skills

1 To separate two clauses Where the second explains more fully the meaning of the first.
For example: ’l-le was feeling very cheerful that morning: the sun was shining and it was the
first day ofthe summer holidays.’

2 To introduce a number of items in a list. For example: ‘Before departure, please check that
you have the following: passport, money, tickets, change afclothes and cellphones.’

3 To introduce a speech or quotation. For example: ’Juliet: Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art
thou Romeo?’

Apostrophes

The apostrophe is used for two main purposes; the first one is quite straight—forward; the
second is a little more complicated.

1 To indicate the omission ofa letter or letters when a word or words have been contracted.
For example: ‘I didn’t do that. It’s not true. You weren’t there.’

2 To indicate possession. in English, the possessive form ofa noun is shown as following.

a In the singular, the possessive form is made by adding —’s

girl the girl’s book
boy the boy’s hat
house the house’s windows

b in the plural, when the plural is made by adding~s to the singular, the possessive is
made by adding an apostrophe afterthe es (5’)

girls the girls’ books
boys the boys’ hats
houses the houses’ windows

Notes

1 When the plural ofa noun is not made by adding is, the possessive is made by adding 7’5.
men the men’s office
children the children’s toys

women the women’s cars

2 The apostrophe is required in expressions like: a month’s wait; a week’s holiday; an hour’s
journey.

 

Speech marks and inverted commas

Speech marks (inverted commas) are used to enclose a passage ofdirect speech, that is the
precise words which are said (orthought) by somebody. There are three patterns by which
speech can be represented.

l Anita’s father said to her, “If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, we’ll visit the seaside.”

2 “Please, Daddy,” replied Anita, “can we go even if it does rain? I’m sure it will stop by the
afternoon.”

3 “i suppose we could,” answered her father. “We ought to make the most ofour holiday.”J 3 Kev writing skills l

3

I‘d

 

 
     
  

Notes
In the first sentence a comma is used before the words are spoken. The first word ofthe direct
speech has a capital letter.

In the second sentence the words ‘repliedAn/ta,’ which break the direct speech, are separated
from the rest ofthe sentence by commas. The opening word ofthe second part of this direct
speech sentence does not have a capital letter, because it continues a sentence that has
already started.

In the third sentence the two parts ofthe direct speech, separated by ‘answeredherfather’ are
complete sentences. For this reason “We” has a capital letter.

When you are writing a conversation between two or more people, remember that you should
start a new line for each new speaker.

Inverted commas are also used to indicate the titles of books and films for example, “The Old
Man and the Sea”; “The Pink Panther”.

   
  
   
  
      
  

 

Dashes and hyphens

The dash has a variety of uses. Its main use is to indicate an interruption to the planned flow
ofa sentence, for example by an afterthought or interjection. A dash is placed before and
afterthe words interjected into the sentence unless the interruption occurs at the end ofa
sentence when a full stop, question mark or exclamation mark replaces the second dash.

For example

"He showed me his new house — very nice it was too e that he hadpurchased from a
famous celebrity”

“He showed me his new house that he had purchased from a famous celebrity — and very
nice it was too!”

For example
"The police made sure the identity oerS » was not revealed.”

“Please, please don’t ‘ he begged, but it was too late!”

 

Finally, a dash can be used to indicate a sudden dramatic end to a sentence:

For example

“ill tell you who the culprit was,”said the detective. “It was ‘ the Headteacher”3 lieu writing skills

A hyphen is not a punctuation mark at all; it is simply a device for linking compound words
together. For example, the phrase ‘sixrtoot Guards’ means that there are some guards who are
six feet tall; on the other hand ‘six Foothuards’ means that altogether in numberthere are six
Foot—Guards (soldiers belonging to the regiment of Foot—Guards).

The hyphen is also used to split a word into syllables when there is no room to tit the
complete word into the space at the end of a line. In this case, the hyphen should always be
placed between syllables, for example, ‘walkring’ but not ‘walkin—g’.

The dash is distinguishable from the hyphen in appearance by being slightly longer.

 

Importance of punctuation

Using punctuation correctly is important in ensuringthat you communicate clearly. For
teachers to appreciate yourwork, you should be able to demonstrate secure control otfull

stops, commas and apostrophes; in particularyou should be able to use full stops conﬁdently
to separate sentences.

One of the features of a high level writing performance is the ability olthe writerto use

punctuation devices such as semicolons and colons to shape meaning and to elicit particular
responses from the reader.

Positive punctuation

 

What are yourthoughts about the way these three statements have been punctuated?

1 When she awoke, the rain was pounding down heavily on the rootofthe house, Sunita
decided that it would be a good idea to go back to sleep.3 Kunming skills 1

2 When she awoke, the rain was pounding down heavily on the roof ofthe house. Sunita
decided that it would be a good idea to go back to sleep.

3 When she awoke, the rain was pounding down heavily on the roof of the house; Sunita
decided that it would be a good idea to go back to sleep.

There is clearly an error of punctuation in the first sentence as the comma is not a strong
enough punctuation mark to separate the two main clauses.

The next two sentences, however, are correctly punctuated. In the second sentence, the full
stop is used to make two independent sentences and to separate the two main clauses.

However, by using a semicolon between the clauses in the third sentence, the writer has
succeeded in giving equal emphasis to each part ofwhat is now one unified sentence which
skilfully combines the two main ideas.

Exercise 4

Rewrite the following sentences using commas, full stops, semicolons, apostrophes and speech
marks as required.

1 Thejourney can be made by road rail sea or air

2 lffor instance you want to buy a television set the best place to go is the electrical shop you can
find this in the centre oftown

Sanjeevs books were lost somewhere in his fathers office
Excuse me sir can you tell me whats happened to my football?

Abraham Lincoln the President of the United States was assassinated while watching a play

mU'I-b-OJ

According to the Fahrenheit scale as you know water boils at 212 degrees on the other hand
according to the Centigrade scale it boils at 100 degrees

7 Many animals are renowned for their ferocity the tiger the lion the rhinoceros and the wolf are
just a few of these

8 He had waited all day for his turn it was now six o’clock in the evening and he decided it was
' time to go home

9 We thank you very much for your hospitality said Rohit now we would like to wish you good
night

10 Have we far to go now? asked my sister from the back seat ofthe car I’m getting very bored with
thisjourney

11 The two teachers cars were damaged when the schools best batsman hit a huge boundaryl 3 Kevwriting skills

12 The detective looked closely at the murder scene This looks like a good clue I have a good idea
who was responsible he said triumphantly

 

Exercise 5

Provide the missing punctuation marks for the following piece of writing. Use capital letters
wherever required.

They had been driving for hours: the countryside was fiat and uninteresting and jamals
attention as he sat behind the wheel ofthe old battered toyota was beginningto wander ahead
of him he could see a shape iike a hill although it was difficuit to distinguish things clearly
because of the mist which was rising from the ground in his mind he thought it could be a great
castle maybe it was where the wicked witch was keeping the beautiful princess prisoner watch
out suddenly cried out ahmed be careful what youre doing you idiot. you nearly drove us into
the ditch just now sorry mumbled jamal i must have been daydreaming

Exercise 6

Now write some interesting sentences of your own illustrating all the different punctuation devices
that have been explained in this section. You should try to show the different effects that can be
achieved by being in control ofpunctuation.

 

Paragraphing

Paragraphing is one ofthe most important ways of structuring and organising your writing.

Remember
Teachers are impressed by essays which are clearly structured through connected and
linked paragraphs.

All paragraphs should contain a topic sentence, i.e. a sentence which contains the main
point ofthe paragraph. You can vary the structure ofyour writing by varying the position
in which you place the topic sentence in different paragraphs A good way to plan your

work is through noting the different topic paragraphs you will use throughout the essay.

Once you have decided on yourtopic sentence, the rest ofthe paragraph should relate
to it and develop from ortowards it in a logical and coherent way.

 

When you are planning your essay, it is a good idea to plan yourwork by thinking about
paragraphs and theirtopicsl3 Rewriting skills l

W

An example of a well—constructed paragraph follows; the topic sentence is written in
bold type.

 

There is a strict dress code for the Golden Temple First ofall the head must be covered at all
times. Scarves of various colours are readily available for non—Sikhs, either from any one of the
17 young lads who converge on you as soon as you pull up outside, or more cheaply from one of
the stalls inside the forecourt. Shoes and socks must be removed Hands must then be washed
at marble—lined public basins and bare feet passed through a trough of water at the bottom of

the steps
Source from Himalaya by Michael Palin

In this paragraph, the first sentence is the topic sentence; it introduces the point about the
dress code needed for a visit to the Golden Temple and the rest ofthe paragraph develops
naturally from this point, with each subsequent sentence adding further details which provide
the readerwith further information.

Exercise 1

Here is another paragraph from the same book, only this time the sentences have been muddled
up. Read through it and then re—write it in the correct order. You should start by identifying the
topic sentence and then beginning with it.

One is entirely devoted to a chapatti production line.

When one side is done the chapattis are flipped over in quick) dexterous movements of a long
thin implement with a half-moon end.

The piles are then removed and carried out to the refectory. The kitchen is spread through
several buildings.

A rat skips nimblv out ofthe vvay as fresh sacks of flour are cut open and fed into the bowels of
a slowly turning machine) which regurgitates the flour as dough

When the flipper is satisfied both sides are right he gives an extra strong flick; which sends the
chapatti flying off the hotplate to land neatly on a pile on the floor

One group of helpers rolls the dough into balls, another flattens each ball out into a pancake,
and another lays them out on hotplates the size ofdouble beds? made from castiron sheets
laid on bricks with gas fires underneath, and capable of taking a couple of hundred chapattis at
a time

mum horn l‘r‘wlr’ﬂ/i‘wi lit, Mitilﬂt‘l Pain“3 KEY writing skills

Exercise 2

Below are four topic sentences. Use each of them as the basis for a single paragraph of your own.
Try to vary the position of the topic sentence by putting one at the start of a paragraph, one at
the middle and one at the end. You could also write different paragraphs using the same topic
sentence in different positions and consider the effects thus produced.

1 Thisis whatllike bestabout my family home.

2 When it was allover,she quickly left the room.

3 This is the most memorable thing about the main street first thing in the morning.
4

When he woke up, it was the first thing he remembered.

 

Grammar and syntax

Grammar is the science of language and involves the rules of standard written and spoken
expression. Syntax refers specifically to the grammatical structure of sentences.

English, as everyone who speaks and writes it knows, is a grammatically complex language
which is continually developing. This is not the place to give a detailed account ofthe
grammatical structures of English. But in order foryour writing to convey its meaning clearly
and unambiguously to the reader, it is important thatyou are thoroughly familiarwith certain
formalities of English syntax.

Remember

ln one of his essays, George Orwell listed what he considered to be some basic rules

of good writing. Perhaps the most important one ofthese was the final one in which
he advised his readers to ‘break any of these rules, ratherthan say anything outright
barbarous’l It is important that you keep this advice in mind at all times. Rigid
adherence to what are perceived to be the unfaltering laws of grammatical correctness
can frequently produce writing which is stilted and unnecessarily pompous in tone. To
take one simple example; some people believe that they should never use colloquial
contractions (such as ‘they’re’, ‘you’re’, ‘that’s’) in their writing.

Certainly, such contractions may be out of place in a particularly formal piece ofwriting.
But if you are writing a letterto a friend (for example as a Directed Writing task, or an
informal piece of description or narrative for Composition), not using such contractions
would be likely to spoil the overall tone and register of yourwriting. The result will be
that the reader would find it difficult to be fully engaged with what you

are saying.3 Key writing skills l
\

Errors of agreement

It is important that subjects and their verbs should agree in number (ie. whether they are
singular or plural). Sometimes, especially in a complex sentence, it is very easy to forget
this. For example, in the following sentence, the writer has forgotten that the subject of
the sentence (‘storeroom’) is singular because of the number of plural nouns which come
between it and the verb (‘were’):

‘The storeroom, fuli of books, broken desks and chairs, buckets, brooms and vacuum cleaners
were very much in need of tidying up.”

\
Consistency In tenses

One of the most common errors made by students in their writing is to fail to write
consistently in the same tense. A simple example ofthis is shown in this sentence: ‘/ was
feeling hoppyso /go to see my best friend.”

In this example, the writer has started in the past tense (was) and has then changed to the
present (go). This is incorrect and confuses the reader.

However, confusion with tenses is not always as straightforward as in this example. Look at
the following passage and decide what is wrong with it.

it is a very warm day so i decided to visit my friend, \iijay. The idea would be a good one as Vijay
would live in a house near the sea and i think that we should visit the beach.

The tenses in these sentences are very confused indeed. The writer begins in the present
tense, then slips into the past before using two unnecessary conditional forms (‘would’ and
‘should’) before coming back to the present again with ‘think’.

Rewrite the above two sentences using first of all the present tense consistently and then the past
tense. Which version do you prefer?

\
Other common errors

Wroneg used prepositions

Prepositions are words that are placed usually before nouns and pronouns to indicate

some relation, for example in, on, to, at. Usingthese precisely is an essential requirement for
expressing yourself accurately.

For example

We fell by the telephone’ has a different meaning from ’He fell on the telephone?l 3 Kevwriting skills

Misunderstanding of singular nouns ending
in —s
The items ofclothlng known asjeans and pants are grammatically plural forms and do not

have singular forms; it is, therefore, incorrect to write ‘He was wearing a pair ofpant’ and ’She
spilt drink on herjean.’

Tautology

Tautology is saying exactly the same thing more than once, especially within the same
sentence. For example, ‘At the end ofthe outing the students returned back to school’ and
‘The true facts ofthe accident are these’. In these sentences the words back and true are
unnecessary: return means to go back and facts are, by

definition, true.

Spelling

As most students are fully aware, English spelling is difficult to learn because it is often
irregular and, in particular, does not give a simple representation ofthe spoken sounds. The
guidelines that follow, however, may sometimes help you to avoid making some ofthe more
common spelling errors.

 
     
 

Notes
A prefix is a syllable added to the beginning ofa word which modifies its meanings. Similarly, a
suffix is a syllable added to the end of a word.

- Words ofone syllable ending in a single consonant following a single vowel double the
consonant before a suffix starting with a vowel: swim, swimmer, sad, sadden, bat, batting.

- The last consonant is also doubled in words of more than one syllable if that consonant
follows a single vowel and if the accent is on the final syllable: permit, permitted, refer,
referring, begin, beginner.

- There is no doubling ofthe final consonant when (a) the consonant follows double vowels,
or (b) when the accent is not on the final syllable: conceal, concealed, proceed, proceeding,
offer, offering, benefit, benefited.

- When adverbs are formed by adding -—ly to adjectives ending in —I, there is always a
double —l: full, fully, helpful, helpfully.

- Words ending in a silent —e drop the —e before a suffix beginning with a vowel but retain
it before one beginning with a consonant: love, lovable, lovely; excite, exciting, excitement.
However, ifthere is a c org before the silent e, the e is retained before a suffix beginning
with a vowel: notice, noticeable, courage, courageous.

- Words ending in —y following a consonant change the —y into —i before a suffix: baby,
babies, fry, fried. However, ifthe —y follows a vowel the change to —i does not take place:
monkey, monkeys, chimney, chimneys.

- In words having the sound of ‘ee’, —i comes before —e except after c: believe, receive,
conceit. (Exceptions to this rule are: seize, counterfeit, weird.)

- When prefixes such as un—, en— or in— are added to words beginning with ‘n’, a double ‘n’

occurs: necessary, unnecessary, named, unnamed, numerable, innumerable.v

3 Kev writing skills l

 

\

Tone and register

Let us look more closely at two ofthe Assessment Objectives:
- usea range ofappropriate vocabulary
- use register appropriate to audience and context.

These refer to the tone or register ofyour writing or, in other words, to those features ofyour
writing which give it its individual quality orstyle. For example, your tone could be described
as formal or informal, humorous orserious and should be very much suited to the type of
writing that you are producing. What is especially important is that your tone stays consistent
throughout your essay. The key features that go to making up a writer’s tone are:

. writer’s standpoint - sentence types and structures

- vocabulary - use of figures ofspeech.

Now we’ll consider these features more closely.

\
Writer’s standpoint

By this, we mean the attitude which, as a writer, you choose to adopt in orderto present your
ideas and characterto the reader. The first decision to be made is whether you are going to
use the first or third person to express yourself.

in general, ifyou choose to write in the first person (‘I think ...’) you are likely to establish an
informal tone as you are talking directly to the reader as an acquaintance. This informality of

'tone can be reinforced by the use of colloquial abbreviations (‘l don’t agree with this point of

view’ etc).

ifyou choose to write in the third person (‘lt is thought that  or ’People think ...’), then your
tone becomes more objective and impartial as you have removed the personal element. So,
you are likely to produce a more formal piece ofwriting. ,,

it should be remembered that if you are writing a story, then the choice of narrative
standpoint is particularly important as the decision to use a first person approach means
that yourstory can deal only with events which can be known to and experienced by the
narrator; ifyou choose to write using
a third person narrative, you are in a
position of having a more complex
overview of the events in your story.

Many students create significant
problems forthemselves when
ending theirstories by not thinking
through the implications oftheir
choice ofnarrative standpoint
before they begin to write.
Conclusions such as ‘and then i died
...’ are seldom convincingll 3 KEY Wl'ilillﬂ Skills

3
Vocabulary

The proper words in the properp/oces 7 Jon athan Swift

Never use 0 long word where a short one will do — George Orwell

These two statements from two great writers of English remind us that having a wide enough
vocabulary to be able to select exactly the word you need to convey a precise shade of
meaning is an essential requirement for writing an impressive essay.

However, it should be noted that neitherwriter suggests that good writing depends on
showing off a wide vocabulary simply torthe sake ofdoing so. English is a language rich
in synonyms and the ability to be able to select the most suitable words is a skill which all
writers should aim to develop.

in your own writing you should always try to keep a clear picture in your mind otwhat you
are writing about and then think carefully ot the most etiective words to convey what you are
thinking about to your reader: in particular, well—chosen verbs and adverbs can be especially
helpful tordoingthis.

Exercise 1

Now let’s look at an exercise to test your awareness ofthe shades of meaning in different words,
all used to describe something which you can smell. Use each of the following words in a different
sentence in orderto bring out its full meaning. You should use each word as a noun.

 

/ \

- smell

odour

perfume

scent
aroma _______________________________________ A__ ______________________ _

stench

stinkI 3 Kevwriting skills l

Exercise 2

Here is another exercise in choosing the best word to convey a precise meaning. This time you are
required to look at adjectives and adverbs and should choose the most appropriate word from

the different options you are given in order to produce a paragraph which describes a particular
atmosphere.

The street swarmed with (fierce/frantic} people all rushing (carelessly/desperately) to reach
their destinations. in the road, {angryr’irustratedi motorists sat in their cars, (noisily/fiercely)
sounding their horns in their hope to break up the (huge/unending) trafficiam. A policeman
stood (bewilderedly/importantly) on a (small/rickety) platform surrounded by traffic, his
signals being completely ignored by ail concerned. On one side of the road, sitting under a
(tattered/colourful) umbrella to shelter him from the (burningfrelentless) sun, sat an {old/aged)
man who was watching the scene with (detached/amused) interest.

Notes
None ofthese words is wrong; you are being asked to choose those you think describe the

scene with most clarity. You should also aim to produce a description which is consistent in
its tone.

 

\
Confusions

Many writers of English blur the communication of what they want to say by confusing words

which either sound similarto another one or which have a similar but not exactly equivalent
meaning.

Some of these words are listed below. Write sentences with each ofthem to make their
' meaning clear.

 

/ \

Notes

You may need to use a aVOId/prevent
dictionary to check the

meaning ofsome or all SEW/“V9
ofthem.

 

bring/take

 

u ninterested/d isi nterested

bored/boring

there/their/they’re

your/you’re

horde/hoard

principal/principle

affect/effect3 lieu wrillnu skills

 

Figures of speech

Anotherway to make yourwriting interesting is by making use of figures ofspeech such as
similes and metaphors as these can add depth and detail to what you intend to say.

A simile is a comparison introduced by the words like or as, in which things, actions, people
etc. are compared with otherthings, actions, ideas etc. of a totally different kind. For example:
‘The teacher surged into the classroom like a stotelygal/eon in full soil.’

A metaphor is a kind of concentrated simile in which a comparison is made by sayingthat
one thing is actually anotherthing of a totally different kind; for example: ‘The bonnerof
smoke flew proudly from the factory chimney.’ Instead ofsaying that the smoke from the
chimney looked like a large flagflying from it (which would be using a simile) the use ofthe
metaphor makes the smoke and the banner one and the same thing, with the result that the
comparison is more immediate in its effect.

It is important, however, that you use such figures ofspeech selectively and thoughtfully.

Try to be original in your use of similes and avoid using cliched comparisons such as he ran
like the wind. However, you should also make sure that there are clear points of comparison
between the two elements ofyour similes. It is also a good idea not to overdo the use of
similes as too many will have the effect of clogging up your writing — remember, be selective
and always think about what might be the effect on the reader of the stylistic choices you
have made.

Your choice ofsimiles and comparisons should give an indication ofyour personality as a
writer and is, therefore, another way of establishing the individual tone ofyour writing.