12 Selecting content noints

Ill Sllllllllﬂl'll (IIIBSIIOIIS

 

A key reading skill, and one that you will be assessed on, is to scan and analyse a text, by
identifying and summarising required information, such as similarities and differences,

or advantages and disadvantages, or problems and solutions, or causes and effects, or
actions and consequences. A question which deals with your ability to demonstrate these
skills is a summary question. In any summary question, you are asked to read a passage
and show that you have understood it by writing a short text ofyour own based on the
original. The subject matter ofyour short text, or summary, will depend on what you have
been asked to do.

What follows is a list of typical summary tasks. What you are asked to do here is called
the rubric.

1 Write a summary ofthe problems encountered on thejourney.
2 Summarise the skills the writer thinks are necessary to become a good swimmer.
3 Summarise the advantages and disadvantages of recorded music.

4 Write a summary of the ways in which advertisers use celebrities to sell products,
and the disadvantages of this strategy.

5 Summarise the ways in which coral reefs are under threat.

The first stage is to read the rubric properly and be quite clear in your mind what you are
being asked to do.

The second stage is to read the passage carefully, orthe area ofthe passage which you are
being asked to summarise, at least twice. Read it the second time with the summary rubric
in mind.

The third stage is to select the content points. These are the pieces of information which
you need to follow the rubric. So, in the first example listed earlier, the content points

will be problems encountered, in the second example the content points will be skills
necessary to become a good swimmer, and so on. At this stage, you are free to use note
form or to write in sentences; you are can use words from the passage or your own words.
We will say more about this at a later stage; at this point, we are thinking only of content
points and how to select them.

W12 SBIBGIiIIQ content noinls ill summary IIIIGSIiIIIlS

Exercise 1: The Uses of Silk

Read the passage and answer the question which follows it.

   

At first, silk was the monopoly of the Chinese imperial family? who used it for sunshades and
banners. As it became more plentiful, it was utilised for clothing, but exclusively for members
of the court. Only the Emperor and his first wife wore yellow silkuthe colour ofthe sun. His
other wives wore violet, as did high—ranking officers. Those ofthe second rank were red and
the rest had black. Later; the favour of being able to wear silk was extended to landowners and
merchants who sought to out~dazzie each other in a riot of colour. Eventually} ordinary people
could wear silk clothes, although they were not so elaborately embroidered} nor did they have
the tea-cups of lacquered silk, customary with the wealthy. Silk achieved importance in other
ways. Until the invention of paper} people wrote on it. it became a popular currency, with even
taxes paid in it.

Working with a partner, make a list of the six things people used silk for.

The first stage is to read the rubric carefully and be quite clear in your mind what you are
being asked to do. In this case, the task is to list the uses ofsilk. These words e ‘used’ and
‘silk’ — should be at the front ofyour mind as you approach stage two.

The second stage is to read the passage carefully at least twice. Remember to keep the key
words e ‘used’ and ‘silk’ e at the front ofyour mind as you read

The third stage is to select the content points. These are the pieces of information which you
need to follow the rubric.

The word ‘used’ appears in the first sentence and it is easy to link it to ‘sunshades’ and ‘banners’,
which follow closely afterthe word ‘used’. The word ‘utilised’ appears in the second sentence,
and ‘utilised’ is a synonym for ‘used’. Good writers avoid repeating words and so this writer has
used a synonym, but because we have the rubric key words — ‘used’ and ‘silk’ — at the front of
our minds, we do not miss the signpost. So it is clear that silk was utilised, or used, for clothing.12 Selectin content noints in summary llllﬂSIiﬂllS l

Pa

The third, fourth, fifth and sixth sentences, and the first part ofthe seventh, give details of

the groups of people who were entitled to wearsilk and the colours each group wore. These
groups are the Emperor, his wives, high—ranking officers, landowners, merchants and ordinary
people. However, because we have the key words at the front of our minds — ‘silk’ and ‘use’ \
we are not tempted to use any of this material in our list of uses ofsilk, because this material
gives extra information about the use ofsilk which we have already found, namely that it was
used for clothing.

But when we read on into the seventh sentence, with the key words ~ ‘used’ and ‘silk’ ~ at
the front of our minds, we see that silk was used by wealthy people to make tea—cups. The
eighth sentence repeats the idea that silk was used and so, although no particular use is
specified in the sentence, it is a furthersignpost and alerts us to the possibility that by reading
on we will find other uses for silk.

And so, in the ninth sentence, we see that silk was used as writing material, and finally in the
tenth sentence we see that it was also used as money. The extra information about taxes is
not a separate point, any more than the information given about the groups of people who
wore silk and the colours that they wore. The information about taxes is linked to the idea of
money, which we have already found as a point.

People used silk for:

l sunshades 2 banners 3 clothes
4 tea—cups 5 paper 6 money

 

These six points are called the content points.

We saw that there are two sections of extra information in the passage. The first section is the
detail about the people who were entitled to wear silk and the colours they wore. The second
section of extra information is the reference to taxes. These sections of information are not
content points because they do not referto particular uses ofsilk, which was the rubric.

The purpose ofthese sections is to give additional information and colourto the passage, to
elaborate on the basic information given about the uses people found for silk. They are called
elaboration points.

Exercise 2: The Wearers of Silk

Working with a partner, make a list ofseven people or groups of people who wore silk, and write
beside each group what colour of silk they wore. Do not include ordinary people in your list.

You should have something like this:
emperor « yellow
emperor’s first wife ~ yellow

emperor’s other wives ~ violet

second-ranking officers ~ red

1
2
3
4 high-rankingofficersvviolet
5
6 otherofficers—black

7

landowners and merchants — many colours.in the exercise we havejust done, we see that the section of the passage about people who
wore silk and the colours they wore is not a section ofelaboration. it is a section of content
points because the rubric has changed.

Remember
Before looking for content points, it is important to be sure ofthe rubric and to isolate

the key words and keep them at the front of your mind as you read the passage.

Exercise 3: A Bad Start
Read the passage and answer the question which follows it.

The day started off badly and got steadily
worse and worse. My sister spent ages in
the bathroom, even longer than usual,
and so i was late with my shower. When

i was halfway to the bus stop, i realised i
had left my bus pass on the kitchen table
and had to go back for it, after which i
raced back to the bus stop, sweating,
dishevelled and breathless. My sister,

of course, was already there, looking
relaxed, demure and very well~showered

She smiled a knowing smile at me as if
to say: ‘Aren’t brothers awful?’ to her
equally weil groomed friends. To make matters worse, one of my sister’s friends, Padma, was
standing there with her; because i found Padma fascinating and pretty, and had been tryingto
pluck up the courage to speak to her for months, i fett awkward and embarrassed. Clearly, this
was not the day for doing it; I quietiy cursed myself for appearing so silly before her.

1 dashed offthe bus, glad to get away from my sister and Padma. As soon as l reached the
class~it was science first period that daymi remembered that we had been given homework
the last day. How couid l have forgotten to do it? Groaning inwardly, i waited for the-teacher to
ask for the homework notebooks. i took a deep breath and put up my hand to confess.

‘What do you mean, no homework?’ hissed the teacher. ‘It’s lunchtime detention for you, and a
letter home to your parents. l’m surprised at a boy like you forgetting your homework.’

My heart sank. My father would be furious with me.

Working with a partner, make a list of the seven problems which the writer experienced that day.

Use the three steps already outlined to complete this task.

You should have something like this:

1 He was late having his shower.

2 He left his bus pass on the table.
3 He was embarrassed to see Padma/behaved awkwardly with Padma.
4 He had forgotten his science homework.
5 The teacher gave him lunchtime detention.
6 The teacher was to going to send a letter to his parents.
7

His father would be angry with him.

12 Selecting content noints ill summary llllﬂSliﬂllS12 Selecting GDIIIGIII ll0illlS ill summary IIIIGSIiIIIIS l

Exercise 4: Cafe India
Read the passage and answer the question which follows it.

Aruradhu loved Cafe india and went there whenever she had a free afternoon. The coffee

which was served there was perfect, the right blend of beans, not too strong but with a full
flavour. The service was excellent and she had come to know the waiters well, particularly the ‘
charming young man called Sajjad, a university student who worked part—time in Cafe indie to 
pay for his studies. -'

Sitting there today, Aruradhu looked around the familiar space ~— with its checked table
covers, cream walls, slightly fraying carpet — and thought that its familiarity was comforting.
Sometimes, when it wasn’t too hot, she liked to sit on the balcony, which gave a bird’s eye
view of the street below, She watched people chatting, young men watching girls passing

by, and once she had witnessed a pickpocket in action, unaware that he was being watched
from above. On other days, she met up with her friends, former teachers like herself, and they
passed a happy time reminiscing about the good old days in the classroom.

On other occasions, like today, she could read a book ~— crime novels were her favouritesuand
sip coffee contentedly as she pretended not to be listening in to other people’s conversations, a
secret delight.

Working with a partner, make a list of the seven things which Aruradhu likes to do in Cafe lndia. Use
the three steps already outlined to complete this task.

Exercise 5: A Frightening Experience
Read the passage and answer the question which follows it.

Salman was terrified. He had been on his way back home from his friend’s house when the
street lights had gone out and he was walking in pitch darkness. The wind had started howling,
which was always enough to make him frightened. Suddenly Sairnan was reminded of a
newspaper article he had read in his local paper, describing a robbery that had taken place on
a nearby street only the week before. The thief had come from nowhere, it seemed, and stolen
a young man’s wallet. Safe in the security of his warm home, Salman had barely thought the
article important, and had forgotten it instantly, but now it came back to his mind vividly. He
realised that there was no«one about on the street, despite the fact that it was early evening.
What if his watch had stopped, and it was much laterthan he thought? He would certainly be in
for a row when he reached home. That thought did nothing to make him feel better. Suddenly
he heard footsteps behind him. What was that? They got louder and louder, and closer and
closer. He was petrified, his heart racing, his tongue sticking to the roof of his mouth. Was it the
thief he had read about? instinctively he held on to the wallet in his pocket, Should he stand
still or make a dash for his home, which was only a few yards away now? Almost crying with
relief, Salman realised that the walker was none other than his elder brother, walking quickly to
catch up with him. His imagination had been playing tricks on him.

Working with a partner, make a list of the seven things which happen to make Salman terrified. Use
the three steps already outlined to complete this task.

Exercise 6: Anna
Read the passage and answer the question which follows it.

Malini drove along Ansari Road, concentrating on her driving, which was especially necessary
at this time, the rush hour, However, she couldn’t help thinking of her friend, Anna, and the
news she had received that day that Anna’s long~terrn relationship with her boyfriend, Chris,
had come to an end. Anna had put a brave face on as she toid Malini about the fact that Chris
had decided to go to Australia to study and that she wouldnlt see him for at least three years.

More than that, it seemed that his parents had never approved ofAnna, something which
clearly upset her and made her angry. Her own parents did little to make her feel better, she
said, by complaining so much about Chris that she had started avoiding them, something she

 

|88| -
\_12 Selecting content llllilIIS in summary IIIIGSIiIIlIS

wasn‘t proud of, as they were getting older and needed her support more than she needed
theirs. Her father was to go into hospitai soon for an operation, which was very much in her
thoughts. As Malini climbed into her carto drive home, Anna smiieo‘ ruefully. ‘And ! taiied my
driving test last week,’ she said.

Working with a partner, make a list of the seven things which are troubling Anna. Use the three
steps already outlined to complete this task.

\
A word about note form

The rubric describes the selection of content point as ‘notes’. This means that (a) you are free
to write in sentences or notes and (b) you are free to use the words of the passage or your
own words. lfthe point is sufficiently made, teachers are likely to give you credit. However,
‘notes’ does not mean something like lecture notes, which have to be intelligible only to the
writer; the point has to be intelligible to the teachers reading your work tool For example,
ifthe rubric asks forthe advantages of television, and the passage states that television is
entertaining, then it is possible to write ‘entertaining’ as the answer, as long as you put the
word ‘entertaining’ underthe category called ‘advantages’. However, if another content point
according to the passage is that television enables us to see world events as soon as they
happen, it will not be sufficient to write ‘events’ or ‘as soon as they happen’; such a note may
be meaningful to you, but does not make sense on its own. The invitation to write in note—
form is not an invitation to be imprecise: as always, the question must be answered.

x
A word about using your own words

As far as the first part of a summary question is concerned, you are free to make the content
points either by lifting words from the passage or by using your own words. However, you
must bear in mind that in the second part of a summary question, you will be rewarded for
the extent to which you produce a piece ofwriting which is relevant to the task, as well as
being a piece of coherent formal continuous prose which is easy to follow. You will also be
asked to use your own words as far as possible, as using your own words is the best way to
ensure relevance and coherence. So you may wish to deal with the re—casting into your own
words when you get to the stage of writing in relevant and coherent formal continuous prose,
oryou may wish to deal with it at the note—writing stage of content points. It’s up to you,
under the direction of yourteacher of course.

x
A word about fiction and non-fiction

summary tasks

ln examinations, you might be required to write a summary ofa non—fiction text. In this
book, you will be dealing with summaries of both fiction and nonfiction. This does not

matter; the basic skills in summary writing are the same, whether you are dealing with fiction
or non—fiction.