Reading skills

Reading skills are very valuable as they underpin many aspects of our lives, and notjust
within school. Because ofthat, it is important to develop strong reading skills outside the
context ofany examination forwhich you are preparing.

fyou take a few moments to think ofthe importance of reading, you will realisejust how
much reading you do in your everyday lives, forexample navigating yourway round the
signposts oftown, information on the school noticeboards, the instructions for your
womework, etc. At home you may have to read manuals for electronic gadgets, use cookery
jooks — or watch your parents do this —, check times in newspapers of local events or
television programmes, etc. Letters arrive at your home from banks, from charities looking
’or donations, or from businesses trying to sell some goods or services. Newspapers may
3e bought or delivered to your home, enabling family members to keep up with current
affairs and world events.

Qeading all ofthese types of materials 7 and this is not a comprehensive list — requires
many skills, including the ability to scan for information, to follow the line of an argument,
:0 makejudgements and to understand vocabulary. Reading for pleasure is a pastime
many people find delightful: to lose yourself in the gripping plot of a novel, to be
:ransported in your imagination to an interesting setting orto identify with the fictitious
ives of others, all enhance reading skills. The advantages of developing reading skills is
something ofwhich you should be aware; these skills have a much wider context than
:heir assessment in an examination. It is also valuable to understand how these skills will
3e assessed under examination conditions and to practise and develop your reading skills
:hroughout yourcourse.10 Introduction to Reading

 

The key reading skills which you will be developing throughout the course are given in the
assessment objectives as follows:

R1: Demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings.
R2: Demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes.
R3: Analyse, evaluate and develop facts, ideas and opinions.

R4: Demonstrate understanding of how writers achieve effects.

R5: Select for specific purposes.

The Cambridge 0 Level English Language Syllabus will develop yourskills in reading and
answering questions within time limits and therefore you will need to learn to manage your
time and to practise questions against the clock It is important to strike a balance between
time spent on reading and writing your answers, and the best way to arrive at this balance is to

practise The aim ofthis section ofthe book is to give you that necessary practice in manageable
and progressive sections.

 

«w a,»w:nswrwmmmﬁﬂim‘ﬁ?H‘s"