26 combining information

148

 

When you are given comprehension questions which require you to combine information,
you must follow the normal procedures for selection and retrieval ofinformation. What
makes combining questions different from othertypes ofquestions is that in a combining
question you will be required to give more than one piece of information in orderto
answerthe question properly.

\

Signposts of combining questions

The most obvious signpost ofa question which requires you to give more than one answer
is the question which asks fortwo reasons. We have already encountered such questions in
earlier chapters.

A more subtle type of combining question is the question which asks you to answerfully.
The word ‘fully’ often suggests that there is more than one angle to the answer. That
might mean that there are two separate answers, or it might mean that, although strictly
speaking there is only one answer, that answer has sufficient depth whereby there will be
a more obvious answer on the surface of the text and a less accessible answer underneath
the text. Or it might mean that you are required to elaborate on your basic answer in order
foryour answerto be considered acceptable by teachers.

Another signpost of combining questions is the number of marks allocated to any answer.
It is obvious that a question which carries two or more marks is more difficult than a
question which carries only one mark. if any question is allocated two marks, that is a
message for you, telling you that this question might be asking for two distinct answers, or
a depth or elaboration to the more basic answer.l 26 combining iniormatinn 

4

Example 1

The sun beat down on the pavements otthe town. it was home to three thousand or

so inhabitants, with its quaint little market stalls selling hot food, its winding streets
and crowded shops. Outside the town, boys played on the banks ofthe dried—up river,

 

Question: How can you tell that the weather is hot? Give two reasons for your answer. ,
[2 marks] i

Answer 1:
1 I know it is hot because the sun beat down on the pavements.

2 l know it is hot because the river had dried up.

Answer 2:
1 I know it is hot because the sun beat down on the pavements.

2 i know it is hot because the market stalls were selling hot food.

Answer 3:

 

l i know it is hot because the sun beat down on the pavements of the town. It was home to
three thousand or so inhabitants.

2 Outside the town, boys played on the banks ofthe river. The riverwas dried up.

Answer 4:

l I know it is hot because, firstly, the sun beat down on the pavements ofthe town and the
town was home to three thousand or so inhabitants.

2 Secondly, the river was dried up.

Exercise 1

Working with a partner, decide which mark should be allocated to each ofthe examples above,
giving reasons forthe mark decided.

14926 combininyimormatinn

150

You should have something like the following:

Answer 1 is totally correct. Both answers are clearly stated, namely that the sun was beating

down on the pavements, and that the river was dried up. Two answers were asked for, and
two answers were given.

Answer 2 is only partially correct. The first answer is correct, namely that the sun beat down

on the pavements, but the second answer is incorrect. The answer has merely made a wrong
response to the word ‘hot’ in the question and automatically linked it to the word ‘hot’ in the
text. Hot food has nothing to do with hot weather

Answer3 is also partially correct. Although both reasons are given for recognising that the
weather is hot, this answer actually offers four reasons. in such cases, only the first ansWer
in each limb is looked at. To offer more than two answers to a question which asks fortwo
reasons is to offend the rubric, in other words, not to answer the question by not doing what

the question asked. in this particular example, the first reason offered in the first limb is that
the sun beat down on the pavements, which is correct.

The second reason offered in the first limb is that the town was home to three thousand or
so inhabitants, which is incorrect, but is ignored because only the first answer in each limb
is considered. in the second limb, the first answer offered is the only one to be considered
and it is wrong. The fact that the correct answer is offered as a second attempt in that limb is
immaterial; only one answer in each limb was invited by the question.

Answer4 is correct and fully acceptable. We may not like the inclusion of the ‘gloss’ on the
correct answer in the first limb, but it would be unfair to consider the whole answerto be
wrong for that reason, because it nevertheless makes the point that the sun was beating

down on the pavements before it makes either of the two wrong answers. Only the first limb is
considered and, perhaps accidentally, it is correct.

 
     
  

Example 2

  

Samir pedalled his new bicycle along the pavement, gathering speed as he went. He
suppressed the thought that his mother had told him not to go beyond the end of

their street. He was proud of his new bicycle — its shiny wheels, its smart, red frame, its
tinkling bell.

  
 
       
 

and further.

  
    

Then he remembered his mother’s angerthe last time he had disobeyed her— itjust

wasn’t worth it. He pulled on the brakes and reluctantly turned the bicycle back in the
direction of his house.

 
 
   
    

Question: Explain fully why Samir decided not to go any furtheron his bicycle.

Answer 1: He decided not to go any further because his mother had told him not to go
beyond the end of his street.26 combining information

Answer 3: He decided not to go any further because his mother had told him not to go

beyond the end oftheir street and because he remembered her angerthe last
time he had disobeyed her.

Answer 4: He decided not to go any further because he suppressed the thought that his
mother had told him not to go beyond the end oftheir street and because he

remembered how angry she had been the last time he disobeyed her. itjust
wasn’t worth it.

Exercise 2

Working with a partner, decide how correct and acceptable each of the given examples is, giving
reasons for your response in each case.

You should have something like this:
Answer 1 is partially correct. It correctly mentions that Samir decided to go no further because
his mother had forbidden it. However, this answerfails to take into account the word ‘fully’ in

the question, which indicates either a two—part answer or an answer with more depth than a
question which demands a single, direct answer.

Answer 2 is also partially correctly, although it responds to the word ‘fully’ in the question,
and takes account of the fact that either a two—part answer is required or an answerwith
more depth, it merely gives the first two elements ofthe paragraph, the second ofwhich is
irrelevant to the question. The fact that Samirwas proud of his new bicycle is not a reason
to turn back; indeed, it would probably make him want to continue. Answer 2 does not sift
through the entire paragraph to look for depth.

Answer 3 is fully correct and accceptable. This is because it gives the reason that Samir decided
to turn back because his mother had forbidden him to go beyond the end of their street. But

the answer also pays attention to the word ‘fully’ in the question, and gives the idea that Samir
remembered his mother’s angerthe last time he had disobeyed her. Eitherfear of punishment,

or fear of upsetting his mother, is the depth to the answer. This answer goes beyond the simple
statement that his mother had forbidden him to go beyond a certain point.

Answer4 is partially correct. This is because it is not sufficiently focused in its first section.
The point is not made that Samir went no further because his mother had forbidden it. in

fact, by merely copying out ‘he suppressed the thought that his mother had told him not to
go beyond the end oftheir street’, the answer is actually stating the opposite of the correct

answer. Samir is not remembering what his mother had told him because he is deliberately
puttingitout ofhis mind.

By adding ‘itjust wasn’t worth it’ the answer is still valid, because the final sentence doesn’t
make nonsense ofthe sentence which comes before it; it is merely an extra piece ofinformation.

15126 combining intormation l

152

Exercise 3: The Storm
Read the passage and answer the combining question which follows.

Huge waves pounded the stone walls built to keep the sea at bay, smashing free huge [3]

ock :
marble and flinging them aside like pebbles, until the walls cracked and then collaosed‘ S of ‘

1 ‘Huge waves’ pounded the sea walls. Explain fully the comparison used by the

writer to show the strength of these waves. [2 marks] l

Exercise 4: After the Storm
Read the passage and answer the combining question which follows.

Slowly at first, and then from every quarter, the flicker of tiny flames was seen as Venetiang .
went round their stricken city by candlelight, When they met they all said the same thing; that if
the wind had not dropped, and ifa third high tide had entered the lake to boost the two already
there, then quite likely Venice would not have survived.

Because otthe gradual melting oithe ice at the North Pole, the level ofthe sea has been rising,
threatening to reach the level ofthe streets in the city. At the same time the area around the
river has been sinking, taking the city with it. Some ofthis sinking is naturai and inevitable, but
it has been accelerated by the extraction of fresh water from the ground beneath the city for
use in huge industrial developments.

Source: Adapted from the Death 0/ Venice by Stephen Fay and Phillip Knightley

1 Venice was a ‘stricken city’. From Paragraph 1, give two reasons why the disaster

was no worse than it was. [2 mark]

Exercise 5: Protection of the Environment
Read the passage and answer the combining question which follows.

it has now become abundantly clear that, if schemes for the protection ofthe environment
are not initiated and controlled by local people, they stand little chance of success. it is vitaily
important to ensure that the weaith of expertise that still remains in living memory is not lost.

1 I What will be the two results, according to the writer, ‘if schemes for the protection

of the environment are not initiated and controlled by local people’? [2 marks]

Exercise 6: Coral Animals

Read the passage and answer the combining question which follows.
Coral animals, the remarkable little creatures that build coral reefs, are responsibie for creating
the largest structures made by life on earth, big enough, in some cases, to dwarf even the most
ambitious buildings constructed by humankind.
Source Adapted [mm The Gl'rv‘r/‘oeoce Book offoml Reefs

1 Explain fully why the writer describes coral animals as ‘remarkable’. [2 marks]

“  " l) i {we !"'Cis'l‘:" / cl

 

visage .7 32'" Page .1 O] r. ill/oli/cmbe/Qul’ld

Exercise 7: Jasmine
Read the passage and answer the combining question which follows.

Jasmine ieant back against the seat ofthe train carriage, her eyes closed, trying to get her
breathing back to normal. What a start to the day! Her mother had phoned as she was trying to
gulp down some breakfast, with a reminder that it was hertather’s birthday the following week.
Jasmine was irritated that her mother could not have picked a more inconvenient time to phone
and, in any case, she had never forgotten her father’s birthday before. The drive to the station,
which should have taken ten minutes, took longer because ofthe accident on the motorway.

1 Give two reasons why Jasmine was late forthe train. [2]
2 Give two reasons why Jasmine was annoyed at her mother. [2]
[4 marks]l 26 combining iniormation “

Exercise 8: Ayesha visits a friend

Read the passage and answer the combining question which follows.

 

Ayesha was on her way to visit her friend Rama, who was in hospitai, havingjust undergone
major surgery. Ayesha and Rama were both teachers in the same school. They had started
teaching there on the same day and, having started out as colleagues, they had become close
friends. Yes, it was a matter of urgency forAyesha to see Rama that day.

1 Give two reasons why it was ‘a matter of urgency’ for Ayesha to see Rama that day. [2 marks]

Exercise 9: Joseph and Benjamin
Read the passage and answer the questions which follow.

Joseph and Benjamin were playing in a football match for the school team, while their
grandparents cheered them on from the sidelines. Benjamin had already scored a goal.

The fact that they were brothers meant that the bond between them led to a perfect
understanding of each other’s moves on the pitch When halftime came, the teams were
neck and neck, but in the second hait the winning goal was scored by Joseph. Couid the
boys’ success he put down to all that training they had done over the past few months, in bad
weather as well as good? And of course their parents bought them the best of sportswear, for
exampie high quality track suits.

 

 

1 Give two reasons why Joseph and Benjamin were good players in the school team. [2]
2 Explain two ways in which Joseph and Benjamin had been encouraged to be good

football players. [2]

[4 marks]

153