Exercise 1: The Great Wall of China
Read the passage and answer the combining questions which follow.

Nomadic tribes would harass and plunder agricultural areas, making farming impossible
unless some ways were found to stop them. The farmers attacked them to try to force them
away. Although it was expensive, they tried to bring about peaceful relations with them, but
this tactic was a blow to their pride and consequently short—lived.

Finally, they built barriers to prevent invasion and to allow for military defence. Through
time, the building of walls was the solution most consistently relied upon. These walls were
eventually linked up to form what came to be known as the Great Wall.

1

 

in the construction of the Great Wall, the recruitment of labour was a major difficulty In the
early stages, soldiers were used to do this work, and sometimes local peasants as well as
the army were forced to take part. During the reign otone emperor, over a million men were
engaged in the construction of the Wall.

A special penalty existed during the reign of other emperors, under which convicted
criminals were made to work on the Wall as a way of atoning for their crimes.

1 The farmers ‘tried to bring about peaceful relations’ with the nomadic tribes. Apart from

this, what other two methods did they use to deal with them? [2]

2 What three types of labourers built the Great Wall? Use no more than twelve words in
your answer; ' [3]
[5 marks]More exereises ll eomhinlne uIIeinens F; i

“w

Exercise 2: Building the Great Wall
Read the passage and answer the combining questions which follow.

Building materials could be passed from hand to hand in a human chain, which spared

the builders the trouble of long walks on narrow mountain trails, thus avoiding collision.
Simple tools, like the handcart and rope levers, were also used, and sure—footed animals
such as goats and donkeys could be driven up the mountain carrying bricks. Donkeys were
made to carry baskets filled with bricks on their backs; as for the goats, bricks were tied on
to their horns.

1 If it had not been possible to pass building materials from hand to hand, what two
problems would the builders have had?

[2]
l2]

[4 marks]

2 Explain fully what use was made of donkeys in the building work.

Exercise 3: The Destroyed Novel
Read the passage and answer the combining questions which follow.

Having spent some time working, l had just written and counted my first five hundred words
when l remembered baby Octavia; i could hear her making small, happy noises somewhere
along the corridor, but felt it time i should go and see if she was doing something destructive,
like unravelling the end'of the hall carpet. She was remarkably persistent in destruction for
her age.

l was rather dismayed when i realised she was in Lydia’s room and that I must have left the door
open, for Lydia’s room was always full of nasty objects like aspirins and bottles of ink.

I rushed along to rescue her and the sight that met my eyes when I opened the door was
enough to make anyone quake. She had her back to the door and was sitting in the middle

of the floor surrounded by a sea of torn, strewed, chewed paper. I stood there transfixed,
watching the neat small back of her head and her thin, stalkelike neck and flowering curls;
suddenly she gave a great screech of delight and ripped another sheet of paper. ‘Octavia,’ l said
in horror, and she started guiltily, and looked round at me with a charming and deprecating
smile; her mouth, i could see, was wedged full of wads of Lydia’s new novel.

Source: from The Mil/stone by Margaret Drabble

1 Give three reasons why the writer feels she should check up on the baby. [3]
2 Give two reasons why the writer was upset when she realised where the baby was. [2]
3 Explain fully what the baby had been doing. [3]

[8 marks]

Exercise 4: Fatima’s Favourite Subject
Read the passage and answer the combining questions which follow.

‘Bye, Mum!’ shouted Fatima as she rushed to get the school bus. She was looking forward to
her day; a double lesson of her favourite subject. If anyone had asked herfor the reason for
this devouring interest, she would have said she didn’t really know. However, her passion for
literature had begun when her grandfather, himself a keen reader, had given her a copy of a
famous novel when she was only eleven years old; she had found the story so fascinating she
had finished reading it within the week.

Her grandfather’s favourite subject at school had been literature and, like her, he had read this
novel over and over again. In Fatima’s school, there was a limited number of spaces for the
literature class, and Fatima was more than a little anxious she might not be accepted. When
one of the teachers of the subject retired at the start of the holidays, that had made her even
more anxious. However, she was one of the lucky few, and loved every minute of the classes.
She acted out —— in her head at least -— the key events in the novels she read, and pretended ~
again in her head — to be the central character.

As she sat on the school bus, Fatima thought of her notebook hidden in her cupboard, where
she had begun to write her own novel, in order to be famous herself one day.

15527 M0"! exercises in combining questions i

1 Give three reasons why it was appropriate that Fatima’s grandfather gave her a copy of a
famous novel.

2 Explain fully how we can tell that Fatima found the novel her grandfather gave
her‘fascinating’.

3 Give two reasons why Fatima was anxious that she might not be accepted for the
literature Class.

4 How can we tell that Fatima ‘loved every minute of the classes’? Give two reasons for
your answer.

5 Explain fully the purpose of Fatima’s notebook.

156