6 Iliscursiue writing

Sometimes the requirements to recount personal experience, views and feelings, are tested
individually through descriptive writing tasks (which allow you to recount your feelings) or
argumentative tasks (in which you can express your views). Some essay topics, however, otter
you a much wider scope as they allow you to reierto all three otthese requirements; such
essays are what are known as discursive writing tasks. You have a certain amount otfreedom
in the way you approach the tasks as you are able to make your own decision about the
particular aspect otthe task that you want to make the focus otyour writing.

Exercise 1: Music

Here is an example ofa discursive topic and a sample essay. As you read it, make notes ofwhat
in your opinion make it an effective piece of writing. Are there any aspects ofthe essay which
are less successful? In particular, you should consider the writer’s use of language and the
structure of the argument.

Wiliiam Shakespeare, one otthe greatest writers who ever lived, said: ‘if music be the food
of iove, piay onf isn’t that enough testimony to the power of music? Each one of us iistens
to music everyday, whether consci usiy or subconsciously. We hear it everywhere on the
radio, on the television, on our compact disc player, and even perhaps, in the next door
neighbour’s Whistiing. Be it music from the 603, pop music, grunge, rap, ciassical, baroque
or Mozart symphonies, it is aii from the same family M music.

Music has exzoived over the centuries. Two or three honored years ago, everyone was
iistening to what we now cail classical music. This was what made composers like
Beethoven, Bacl ,‘riaydn and many others famous. Overthe test one hundred or so years,

a great range of popular music has developed including the music of the Beatles which
96 IIISGIII’SWO WI'IIIIIII l

appealed to our parents in the 60s through to popular rock music oftoday from which bands
such as My Chemical Romance and Nickelback are raking in millions ofdollars.

Without a doubt, music has a positive effect on the psyche, as proven by studies around the
world. Soothing music such as slow ballads or instrumental music calms the senses and helps
us to relax. lt helps us to unwind after a long day at work and therefore reduces stress levels.

Heavy metal and rock music, on the other hand, can also produce a beneficial effect, albeit
in a different manner as some people prefer listening to loud music to release tension and
stress as they feel that works for them. if it does them good, who are we to tell them to turn
the volume down?

Studies have also shown that listening to classical music helps with brain development. This is
why expectant mothers often put on music by Mozart in the hope that their child will grow up to
be the next Einstein.

Music can break down barriers ofdistance, age, race and creed, as shown by the ‘Live 8’ concert
which was held in 2005 at eight different locations around the world simultaneously. These
concerts were held in the hope of raising enough funds to alleviate poverty in the continent of
Africa. The project was a success and definitely proved that music can bring people together.

National anthems are also a form of music and, more importantly, they are national symbols
for a country. Most champion athletes will say that the greatest moment in their lives is when
their national anthem is played as they receive their Olympic or World Championship medals,
indeed, most organisations, including schools, have their own anthems with which their
members can identify. These tunes symbolise oneness and unity and are sung by everyone
who belongs to that organisation, regardless oftheir position within it.

However, too much of something is not a good thing. ifwe have our radio on at full volume
throughout the day, seven days a week, sooner or later it could take a toll on our hearing as
our hearing range will decrease and in some cases this may result in deafness. Therefore, we
should always be sensible about what we do and listen to music in moderation.

Much has been said about music throughout history and, whether we like it or not, it is here to
stay. Music allows songwriters to express their feelings through lyrics, pianists to express their
emotions through their piano playing and it is a vast industry which provides many people with
their daily living. So, why not look through that CD collection of yours, choose a song you like
and spin it for, according to Auerbach, ‘music washes away the dust of everyday life.’

The writer of this essay has sensibly decided to focus on only a limited range of ideas. (One
of the potential problems with one—word titles is that without careful planning it is very
easy for a student to try to include too many points and become confused.) This writer

has deliberately chosen to write about the type of music which most appeals to him or her
but has developed from writing about specific types of music to make some more general
comments about the value of music to all people. The essay is well structured and the use
ofquotations at the beginning and end, to act as a kind offrame forthe ideas included, is
particularly effective.

425 DiSBIII'SiVG writing

3
Tools for discursive writing

Planning points

Discursive essay writing requires a different approach from writing an argumentative essay.

A successful discursive essay covers a range of points which allows the writer to express his
or her own experiences, views and feelings, although none ofthese points is necessarily any
more important than another. This means that, very often, a discursive essay does not follow
a single line of argument but instead contains a range of points linked by the common theme
ofthe title. Forthis reason, when planning this type ofessay, you may ﬁnd that a spider

diagram approach is the most effective way of doing so. For example, the essay on Music
would have had a plan something like this:

    

    

   
 
 
 
 
   

8. Auerbach 1. We all listen to music

quotation: conclusion

   

2. Types of music
3. Music through time

4. Positive effects of music;
soothes the mind; unites different
people, Live 8 in 2005

 
  

Music
Introduction: importance
of music; Shakespeare

5. NationalAnthems

As you can see, there is no correct order in which these ideas can be expressed (apart from

the introduction and conclusion); the skill ofthe writer lies in relating them together within
the general framework. *

  
 
 

7. Allows you to express
yourfeelings

         
 
  
  

     
  
 

    
  
   

6. Negative effects
of music

    
 

Perhaps more than in other types of essay, the discursive essay is something in which the
style of the writer is as important as the content of the essay. The real skill in producing this
type ofwriting lies in the ability to take a single topic and then elaborate upon it, developing
it in a variety of ways through making imaginative connections between different ideas.

Exercise 2

Here is an example of a professional writer dealing with the apparently uninteresting title ‘Appetite’.
Read through the essay carefully and when you have finished, write two or three paragraphs in which
you comment on what makes it an effective piece ofdiscursive writing. You should comment on the
writer’s use of language, his use of examples and the structure of his writing.

One of the major pleasures in life is appetite, and one of our major duties should be to preserve
it. Appetite is the keenness of living; it is one of the senses that tells you that you are still
curious to exist, that you still have an edge on your iongings and want to bite into the world and
taste its multitudinous flavours and juices.

By appetite, of course, i don’t mean just the lust for food, but any condition of unsatisfied
desire, any burning in the blood that proves you want more than you’ye got, and that you
haven’t used up your life. Wilde said he felt sorry for those who never got their heart’s desire,
but sorrier still for those who did. i got mine once only, and it nearly killed me, and I‘ve always
preferred wanting to having since.6 Biscursive writing J

For appetite, to me, is this state of wanting, which keeps one’s expectations alive. l remember
learning this lesson long ago as a child when treats  were few, and when l discovered that the
greatest pitch of happiness was not in actually eating a toffee but in gazing at it beforehand.
True, the first bite was delicious, but once the toffee was gone one was left with nothing,
neither toffee nor lust. Besides, the whole toffeeness of toffees was imperceptibly diminished
by the gross act of having eaten it. No, the best thing was in wanting it, in sitting and looking at
it, when one tasted an inexhaustible treasure—house of flavours.

So, for me, one ofthe keenest pleasures of appetite remains in the wanting, not the
satisfaction. ln wanting a peach, or a particular texture or sound, orto be with a particular
friend. For in this condition, of course, l know that the object of desire is always at its most
flawlessly perfect. Which is why l would carry the preservation ofappetite to the extent of
deliberate fasting, simply because i think that appetite is too good to lose, too precious to be
bludgeoned into insensibility by satiation and over—doing it.

For that matter, i don’t really want three square meals a day -— l want one huge, delicious 
table—groaning blow out, say every four days, and then not to be too sure where the next one
is coming from. A day of fasting is not for mejust a puritanical device for denying oneself a
pleasure, but rather a way of anticipating a rarer moment of supreme indulgence.

Too much ofanything -— too much music, entertainment, happy snacks or time spent with
friends, creates a kind of impotence of living which one can no longer hear, or taste, or see, or
love, or remember. Life is short and precious, and appetite is one of its guardians, and loss of
appetite is a sort ofdeath. So if we are to enjoy this short life we should respect the divinity of
appetite, and keep it eager and not toomuch blunted.

it is a long time now since l knew that acute moment of bliss that comes from putting parched
lips to a cup of cold water. The springs are still there to be enjoyed —— all one needs is the
original thirst,

Source: lrorn l Carri. Stay long by Laurie Lee

in this essay Laurie Lee has chosen to base his ideas on his own life experiences and his
character and personality are clearly apparent, most noticeably in the third paragraph in
which the example ofthe experience of eating a toffee as a child is developed into a detailed
account which, despite its light—hearted tone, nevertheless contains a serious reflection on
the nature ofhuman experience.

Exercise 3

This is a sample essay written on the topic ‘What lessons can we learn from the past?’ As you will
see, the writer has some quite good ideas but fails to make very much of them. Re—write the essay,
developing fully the points originally made and adding ideas ofyour own. You may choose to
conclude with a statement different from that of the original writer.

Lessons from the past don’t always make our present life happier; sometimes those lessons
make our life worse because we can never forget how we learnt those lessons. Parents always
tell us that we can learn the hard way or the easy way; the easy way being we listen to them

and do what they tell us to, and the hard way being to go out there, do something and actually
realise that maybe we should not have done that but now we have learnt our lesson so we
won’t do it again. People say, ‘Once bitten, twice shy”. l believe this is true and We learnt a lot of
my lessons this way such as now l know it’s not a good idea to run into a wall because a broken
arm and a sprained wrist have made me scared to go anywhere neara solid wall and l know i
won’t be running into one again soon

But l don’t think that lesson will make my present life happier because I amjust left with
memories and an arm i can’t put any pressure on,

Some lessons l learnt make my present life happy, l’m glad i never walked off with a stranger
as my parents told me not to do, but i don’t think the lessons we learnt in the past have much
influence on the way we live our present lives.Exercise 4

Here are some discursive writingtopics accompanied by some suggested opening paragraphs.
Make your own spider diagram plans for each one of the topics and then write your own essay(s) on

one or more ofthem, developing from the given paragraphs.

Weekends

Weekends never seem to arrive and when they do they are over too soon. They are times
when the whole family can be together at home to do what they wish. For those of us who
are at school they provide an opportunity to catch up with some much needed sleep, to
complete those pieces of homework we’ve been intending to do every night ofthe week yet
somehow never got round to and also, weekends are times for us to relax and spend time
with our friends. Weekends provide opportunities for everyone no matter what their age or

circumstances.

The Joys of Travel

What is meant by the word ‘travei’? To some people it means spending a lot of money and flying
to far—away places for a family holiday; to others it could simply involve leaving home in the
morning and making the sameiourney to their place of work or study as they did the day before
and the day before that. it depends on your outlook as to whether you see travel as being a

functional or romantic activity.

Those who think in the latter way are likely to see their main means of travel as being either on
foot or by using public transport such as buses and trains. On the other hand: those who seek
the romance of travel may want to make long sea voyages or dream of riding round the world
on a powerful motorcycle and camping under the stars at night. Thejoys of travel are many and

varied,

 

l 5 niSGIII'SiVG WIiIiIIﬂ

H:  ‘ >~
"mm
In6 niSGIII'SiIIB writing l

Food

Food means different things to different people Basically, it can be defined as substances
which we ingest every day to keep us alive, To some people it is no more than this; to others it
is a source of pleasure and excitement and to these people discovering and sampling different
kinds of food and recipes from all parts of the world is one ofthe great motivations of their
lives. in contrast to this, however, far too many people in some parts of the world sutferfrom
shortage of food and are unsure as to where their next meal will come from. We need to keep
all of these ideas in mind when writing about this topic.

Living in a City
‘lt’s too noisy; i can’t hear myselfthink. Everybody is rushing about with no care for anyone

else. All l want to do is to leave this town and retire to the countryside where l can be at peace
among the pleasures of nature}

‘There’s nothing more exciting than living in the middle of a great city. You have all the
entertainment you want~cinemas, theatres, concert halls, sports arenas. Everywhere you
look, people are moving around purposefully; it’s said that the city never sleeps—l wish that i
could be awake 24 hours a day to make the most of what it has to offer}

These arejust two opinions about living in a city; where do your own views fit in?

Finally, here is a selection of discursive essay titles similar to those that you might
come across in an examination. Choose one and write between 350 and 500 words.

Write about some ofthe things that make you happy and relaxed at the end of a school day.
- Cats

- Being Young

- Mistakes

g The Future is a Serious Matter