W

More exercises ill
summary content noinls

Exercise 1: Queen

The passage which follows describes a journey the writer made with his elephant, Queen.

With a partner, make a list ofthe problems the writer encountered with Queen during the
journey. There is no need at this stage to write in paragraphs or to try to write coherent formal
continuous prose in your own words. We will deal with that later. Concentrate in this exercise on
content points.

As we were reaching the outskirts of the
village, I saw a bus approaching us.

Queen swerved abruptly, causing the collapse
of a tea—staii. We came to a halt amongst a
cascading river of cups and teapots. Glaring
at us, his face a mottled purple, was the
enraged owner.

‘Er  l’m frightfully sorry, sir,“ i gasped ‘You
see my

‘You! youl’ the man shouted furiously.
‘Everything gone, l’m ruined, ill take you to
court.’

‘Now, sir,’ Aditya said. (There’s no need for
that. i am sure we can come to some financial
agreement.’ Afterthe man had cooled down,
we assessed the damage and compensation
was paid. We couldnt get out ofthat village
quickly enough; the drain on my nerves and
on my pocket had been considerable. Besides,
Queen unashamedly kept on helping herself to the cakes which were laid out on some
market stalls. Understandably her greed annoyed the owners and Salim would smack her
trunk, whereupon she would squeeze her small brown eyes shut like a naughty little girl.

 

Eventually, we emerged into open countryside, and to our relief followed a track free of the
din of traffic and the possibility of Queen’s thieving. After a while we noticed that Queen
was limping, a bad sign for our future progress, let alone Queen’s comfort. Salim discovered
the cause —v a metal leg chain with small spikes had obviously been used on her by her
previous owners, One ofthe spikes had caused an ulcer, but, Salim told me. hotvwater and
salt dressings applied nightly would cure it. Although his knowledge ofelephant ailments
reassured me, it took some time to make and apply these dressings.13 More exercises in summary cement Mints

Days passed and ourjourney continued. Queen plodded along, her trunk plucking at branches
from overhead trees, munching with contentment. Nevertheless, it was evident that her leg
was still troubling her. Soon we came to another little town. The animal doctor there explained
that Queen had a serious infection, and that she would need injections of antibiotics. Moreover
this difficult task was to be mine -— and I was distinctly uneasy about it. ’

After mentally marking a spot in Queens enormous side, l shut my eyes and nervouSly plunged
in the needle. l realised my attempt had failed when, with a squeal of rage, Queen trundled
away with a broken needle wobbling precariously out other side.

‘That was incorrect,’ the vet remarked needlessly. ‘Place the needle in straight. Now, we will
try again.’

You should have something like this:

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
ll
12
l3
14

Queen swerved to avoid a bus

and knocked over a tea—stall

the owner was angry

and shouted at them

the writer had to pay compensation to the owner

Queen helped herself to cakes from market stalls

which annoyed the stall owners

Queen was limping

because a metal chain with spikes had been used on her leg
it took time to make and apply the dressings to Queen’s leg
we found out/the animal doctortold us that Queen had an infection
she would need antibiotics

which I would have to give her

I failed to give her the injection properly.
Source: from Travels on my Elephant by Mark Shand

Exercise 2: The Lonely Lighthouse

In the passage which follows, the crew ofa delivery ship are approaching a lighthouse to deliver
supplies to the three lighthouse keepers who live there. It is clear that something is wrong. With

a partner, make a list of the problems which alerted the crew to the fact that something is wrong.
There is no need at this stage to write in paragraphs or to try to write coherent formal continuous
prose. We will deal with that later. Concentrate in this exercise on content points.

The delivery ship drew nearthe
island and the crew noticed
immediately that something was
wrong. There was no welcoming
flag flying from the lighthouse
pole, although the delivery ship
would have been expected.
However, it was possible that the
keepers were busy working out
ofsight on the other side ofthe
island and. therefore, had not
noticed the ship approaching. The
captain ordered the ship’s whistle
to be sounded, but the shrill blast
brought only thousands of sea—birds, from the cliff face, noisy and angry at being disturbed.
There was no movement in or around the lighthouse. With mounting astonishment, the captain
ordered a rocket to be fired over the island and, although it burst its colourful contents with a
loud explosion, still nothing was seen of the keepers.I 13 More exercises in summary content noints J

92

a small group of sailors was instructed to go ashore and find out what was wrong. Perhaps,
they thought, the keepers were ill and could not venrure out of the lighthouse.

They climbed aboard a small boat and revised ashore; The sailors? leader went to the top of the
cliff on which the lighthouse perched, and began running along the pathway, calling out rho
names oithe keepers. Bot the only answer that came was the howling oithe gales.

The keepers normally opened the entrance gate oithe yard when a delivery was expected, but

on this partieular day the gate was closed; it crealied open at his touch and he moved towards the
lighthouse itself, He was surprised to iind the front door was wide open and cautiously he entered
He continued to call out the names oithe three men, but still rte—one answered his shouts,

in the kitchen, two chairs stood next to the table, but the third chair had been knocked over
and was lying on its side. Although it was freezing winter weather, the ashes in the ﬁreplace
were cold, showing that if. was some sime since a fire had been lit. All the pots and pans were
Clean and stacked neatly in their usual places. The clock on the shehC above the fireplace
had stopped.

 

The leader then went into the bedrooms and found that the beds were unmaele,iost as they

would be it their oceuoants had just risen from them and lel‘r hurriedly. 83; now, he was finding

it difficult to control his Feelings. The hairs were standing up on the ‘oacl:  his neck, and he ran

all the way back to the landing point He breathlessly explained to the rest of the crests what he
I

had found, and two ofthe men volunteered to go back with him to she ighthouse.

wthis group of three combed the outbuildings a “id the lighthoase itself; On reaching the top oi
the tower, they found that the  a: riirig {army of the iighlhouse ~eras in working order, out there
\sras a thin film oidust over it, suggostin r r‘ V orr’ie time. in addition, the
last entry in the lighthouses record book was for ten da rs ear; .' ’T: OU‘jh the normal oractice
was to complete “rhe record daily. There was still no trace o; p ,

increasingly clear after this second search that noone was inc-re.

K

 

  

‘   l: was becoming

 X‘ Wu; i"-, H M13 More exercises ill summary GOIIIBIII llllilllS

Exercise 3: School Uniform

The passage which follows describes the advantages and disadvantages of school uniform. With

a partner, make a list of these advantages and disadvantages. There is no need at this stage to
write in paragraphs or to try to write coherent formal continuous prose. We will deal with that later.
Concentrate in this exercise on content points.

 

Many schools insist that the students wear school uniform. Probably the most popular type

of school uniform is a shirt for both girls and boys, with black trousers and black skirt for

male and female students respectively. A tie might also be worn. The heads of schools tend to
favour the wearing of uniform for their students because it encourages a sense of belonging

to the same group, like being in one big family. Furthermore, school uniform puts an end to
any possibility of some students being seen to be better ottthan others. it rich kids have more
money to spend on designer clothes which are popular with the younger generation, the poorer
kids know nothing about it~ All students look the same, both rich and poor, and so school
uniform is a great leveller of social groups. Children can concentrate on their studies without
worrying whether or not they’re dressed in the latest fashions. Fashion items can be kept in
better condition because they are not being worn out in the rough and tumble of hectic school
life. Students are able to concentrate on their studies better as there are no distractions of
wondering who is the ‘coolest’ in the class and where everyone fits in the clothes competition.

 

Outside school, students are clearly identified This is a good thing because they are
ambassadors for their school and, if they misbehaye outside school, the school is easily
identified, A tear of bringing their school into disrepute, or a tear of being identified and their
teachers or parents notiiied, might prevent some antisocial behaviour, especially in big cities,
Conversely, good behaviour admired outside the school day could cause adults to see a
particular school in a good light and want their children to attend it - well behaved students
in uniiorm are an eloquent advertisement iortheir school. Very young children might aspire
to  pupils at that school when they are older because the students inspire them by their
exemplary behaviour.

On the other hand, some students are not so keen on wearing uniform, arguing that it
suppresses their individuality and freedom to express themselves, What is the point, they say,
in everyone being identically dressed? Doesn’t that lead to robots ratherthan human beings,
a biand group of people who are unable to think for themselves or to be creative? Others
might say that parents have to buy yet more clothes for their children when they have to buy
school shirts, trousers, ties, even special shoes, and so school uniform costs rather than saves
money in the family, and puts an extra burden on the finances of a family. i‘his is clearly more
significant in a family with a limited income.

9313 M0"? EXBIGiSES in summary 60MB!“ noinls i

Exercise 4: Titanic

The passage which follows describes the events leading up to the sinking ofthe ship Titanic.
Working with a partner, make a list of all the things that went wrong and eventually became
contributing factors in the sinking of the ship.

Reports showed icebergs nearly in the path of the huge ship; unfortunately, not all these
reports reached her control room. Nevertheless, the captain and his officers clearly knew there
was a distinct possibility, even likelihood, of encountering an iceberg during the night. The
captain must have known the risk he was taking in maintaining Titanic’s speed, but decided

to take it anyway; to have slowed his ship under the circumstances would have suggested

a degree of timidity out of keeping with his character. Also his reputation was involved; he

was understandably proud of it and did not want to damage it at this stage in his career. This
marvellous vessel he commanded was on herfirst voyage while he, ironically, was on his last.

 

The lookouts were specifically warned to watch for icebergs, yet they did not seem particularly
concerned about this possibility. Nor had any extra lookouts been posted. No special
instructions were given to the ship's engineers to stand by for possible emergency manoeuvres.
The advisability of siowing the vessel to allow more time to react should an iceberg be sighted
ahead does not appear to have been considered by the captain. This is hardly surprising as it
would have thwarted the hope for an even higher speed on the following day.

When further messages about icebergs came in from the ship Californian, the young radio
operator on Titanic ignored them. Although he was dedicated to his profession, he did not have
that degree ofiudgement which comes from years of experience. Besides, the glamour of his
job had made him arrogant.

Meanwhile, as one ofthe lookouts neared the end of his watch, an ominous smudge about
the size of his hand loomed on the horizon dead ahead, The object grew rapidly in size and
distinctness. Convinced that one of the icebergs he had been warned about was directly in
Titanic’s path, the lookout raised the alert and watched helplessly as the ship hurtled towards
the sheer grey wall of ice.

w “arr ‘F 1 GW-  Nr‘y; 1'7; ’ mortars; lvl claim/i r mi‘:

94l 13 More exercises ill summary content noints I

With a partner, make a list of the six ways in which rickshaw cyclists put themselves and other
people in danger. There is no need at this stage to write in paragraphs or to try to write coherent
formal continuous prose. We will deal with that later. Concentrate in this exercise on content points.

Exercise 5: Cycle Rickshaws in Dhaka

So crowded are the city centre streets of
Dhaka that sometimes the cycle rickshaw

is the fastest means of transport. But cycle
rickshaws can also be dangerous. Weaving in
and out of traffic may save time but it is not
always safe. Rickshaw cyclists sometimes
try to shorten theirjourney times by going
against the line of oncoming cars, and run
the risk of being knocked off their cycles and
seriously injured.

Damage to cycle rickshaws has become
quite commonplace too —— it is easy to dent
a tyre as you accidentally bump into the
kerb in your attempt to dodge a wide vehicle
like a bus or a car. Scraping the wheel ofa
cycle can also occur in this way, and it can
be so expensive to have a cycle repaired that it causes ﬁnancial hardship in many households.
Cyclists would be safer if they wore helmets, but unfortunately they don’t, as again this would
put additional strain on the family budget. Passengers in cycle rickshaws would be safer ifthey
were strapped in, but there are no safety belts installed in these colourful vehicles.

 

Exercise 6: Tourists in Sri Lanka

With a partner, make a list of the six reasons why tourists come to Sri Lanka. There is no need at
this stage to write in paragraphs or to try to write coherent formal continuous prose. We will deal
with that later. Concentrate in this exercise on content points.

SriLanka, which means ‘Beautiful Lanka’, is a favourite place fortourists. They enjoy its
wonderful climate, its all—year~round heat, especially those from colder, Western countries.
They are drawn to the beauty ofthe island —- the coastal regions and the mountainous areas
—— and it is hardly surprising that millions of visitors arrive each year to enjoy the delights of
this country. Tourist hotels are

ofa high standard? which is yet
another attraction. They are well
designed and modern, with facilities
appreciated by their residents.

The capital, Colombo, ensures an
abundance of stores and boutiques
to suit every taste and wallet,
whether in the latest fashions,

more traditional clothing,jewellery,
perfumes  the list is endless.

Everyone can afford to shop in
Colombo; there are many low budget
shops and hawker stalls; as well as
the glittering, glamorous stores.
Tourists enjoy walking through
neighbourhoods where Ceylonese
food is on sale in a variety of
welcoming restaurants; and where
the very best and tastiest of food is
sure to be served.