162

 

We have already considered a number ofquestions which you might ask yourself before
answering a question in a comprehension exercise ortask. The final two questions in the
list were the following.

- Is the question asking only about the story or argument of the text?l 29 Annreelallnu the wars writers make use 0! language ‘

Example 1: The accident

 

The police car sirens sounded; people stood aside and cars stopped to let them past.
It was clear that an emergency had occurred up ahead. Ambulances sped along the
road and screeched to a halt at the spot where the collision had taken place. As the
ambulance crew stepped out of the vehicle to examine the injured drivers, it seemed
that a real—life drama was about to begin.

 

 

 

Question: Why does the writer say that the ambulances ‘sped’ along the road? [1 mark]

Answer 1: The writer says that the ambulances sped along the road because they were
going to the scene of an accident.

Answer 2: The writer says that the ambulances sped along the road because he wants to
emphasise that they were going very fast.

Answer 3: The ambulances sped along the road because the drivers were racing one
another.

Exercise 1

Working with a partner, decide how correct and acceptable each ofthe given answers is, giving
reasons for your response in each case.

You should have something like this:

Answer 1 is wholly incorrect. it is true that the ambulances were going to the scene ofthe
accident, but that is not what the question is asking This answer is an answerto a different
question, such as ‘Where were the ambulances going?’ This particular question is drawing
your attention to the use ofthe word ‘sped’.

Answer 2 is correct, because it does, in fact, answer the question by focusing on the word
‘sped’. This answer appreciates that the writer could have used, for example, the words

16329 Annrecialing the walls writers make use at language l

164

‘went’ or ‘drove’ or ‘travelled’. The meaning would not have been affected in that we
would still have known that what is being described is the scene of an accident and the
ambulances going there to help the injured. But the word ’sped’ has been carefully ch05En

this is a serious emergency.

Answer 3 is also wholly incorrect, because, although it recognises the fact that the word ‘Spe
has connotations ofspeed, it makes the wrong connection, and the wrong inference that th
drivers were speeding because they were in some sort of competition with one another,

d:
9

Example 2: Visiting Easter Island

Easter island is the most remote inhabited place in the entire world. Until an airport
was made in the 1960’s, it was all but impossible to get to, because the only connection

with the rest of the world was a ship which visited the island once a year. There is now
something called a hotel on the island, so at least now visitors can stay there.

 

Question: ‘There is now something called a hotel on the island’.
Why does the writer not simply say ‘There is a hotel on the island’? [1 mark]

Answer 1: The writerthinks the reader might not know what a hotel is and so he gives
an explanation.

Answer 2: The writer wants to emphasise that visitors can stay on the island whereas in the
past this wasn’t possible.

Answer 3: The writer wants to tell us that by our own standards it is a very basic hotel. it
would hardly be described as a hotel by most people.

Exercise 2

Working with a partner, decide how acceptable and correct each ofthe given answers is, giving
reasons for your response in each case.

You should have something like this:

Answer 1 is wholly incorrect, because it is not reasonable to assume that someone capable
of understanding a passage at this level would not know the meaning ofa common and
international word like ‘hotel’.

Answer2 is also wholly incorrect, because it is a literal comprehension of the question,
explaining only the advantage of now having a hotel on the island. However, it does not
answerthe question, which was asking for an explanation ofwhy the writer says ‘there is
something called a hotel’ and not ‘there is a hotel’. This answer merely answers the first
possible question, i.e. ‘why does the writer tell us there is now a hotel?’ rather than the real
question, which is ‘why does the writertell us there is something called a hotel?’

focuses on that. There is a clear difference between a ‘hotel’ and something of a hotel’,
and the thrust ofthe use ofthe word ‘something’ is that it isn’t much ofa hotel, it’s of poorl 29 Annrecialing the ways writers make use or language 

Example 3: The Streets of Dhaka

As Hemu walked through the streets of Dhaka, he marvelled at the vastness of the city,

so different from the little village he had left behind. He loved the feel ofthe city 7 the
crowds makingtheir way through the evening darkness, the roar of the traffic and the
illuminated buildings like stars by which people navigated their way home.

   

Question: Explain fully why the writer says that the buildings were ‘like stars’? [2 marks]
Answer 1: The writer says that the buildings were like stars because they were lit up.
Answer 2: The writer says that the buildings were like stars because they were beautiful.

Answer 3: The writer says that the buildings were like stars because they were bright and
people used them to work out their whereabouts

Exercise 3

Working with a partner, decide how correct and acceptable each of the given answers is, giving
reasons for your response in each case.

You should have something like this:

Answer 1 is partially correct, because it makes one comparison between stars and the buildings.
The buildings were bright and twinkling with light, just as the stars in the sky are bright and
twinkling. However, ifthe mark allocation had been taken into consideration, and the word
‘fully’ in the question, it should have been seen that there are two parts to the answer.

i Answer 2 is wholly incorrect, because, although most people would considerthe stars to be
beautiful, there is nothing in the passage to link stars to beauty. The answer is not based on
the passage but rather comes from the opinion of the person answering the question.

 

Answer 3 is correct and fully acceptable, because it has responded both to the allocation of
two marks forthe question and to the presence ofthe word ‘fully’ in the question». It focuses
on the word ‘illuminated’ in the text and makes that link between the brightness ofthe stars
and the lights in the buildings.

It has then gone on to focus on the word ‘navigated’ and make the further connection that
sailors use the stars to navigate theirway through the sea, in the same way as people in the
city use the light from buildings to find their way through the city.

Exercise 4: The Flood
Read the passage and answer the writer’s craft questions which follow.

People came down from the safety of the upper floors of their houses to inspect the ruin
caused by the flood: oil stains, debris, filth and drowned animals were everywhere,

Slowly at first, and then from every part ofthe city, the flicker oftiny flames was seen as the
people went round their stricken city by candlelight. The candle flames danced in the soft
breeze and their gentle movements seemed to mock the occasion,

Source: from The Death (iii/Erika: by Stephen Fay and Phillip hnigl'itley

1 People ‘went round their stricken city’. What effect is gained by the word ‘stricken’ that

would not have been achieved by the word ‘flooded’? [l]

2 Why is it appropriate to say that the candle flames ‘danced’? [1]
3 Explain fully what the writer means when he tells us that the candle flames ‘seemed to

mock the occasion’. l2]

[4 marks]

16529 ﬂllﬂfﬂﬂlﬂllllﬂ Illa Willis writers make use 0' language [

166

Exercise 5: The Kitchen Table
Read the passage and answer the writer’s craft questions which follow.

We sat down to table in the cramped kitchen. The table was left from the shop’s bakery deiij
a massive piece of rough-cut pine cross—hatched with knife scars into which veins ofancient
dough, dried to the consistency of cement, had worked to produce a smooth marbly finish,
Source: from Ci‘iOCU/‘Ui by Joanne Harris

1 What effect is produced by the writer’s use of ‘scars’ instead of, for example, ‘marks’?

[1]

2 The marks on the kitchen table have ‘veins ofancient dough’. Explain exactly what is being
described here. [2]
3 Why does the writer describe the surface of the table in places as ‘marbly’? [1]
[4 marks]

Exercise 6: The Market in Mumbai
Read the passage and answer the writer’s craft questions which follow.

Rohit meandered through the market in Mumbai. He was on holiday after all, and the day was
stretched out before him like a century,

1 Explain fully what effect the writer gains by her use ofthe word ‘meandered’. [2]
2 Rohit was on holiday for the day. Why, therefore, does the writer compare the day to

a century? [1]

[3 marks]

Exercise 7: Spring
Read the passage and answer the writer’s craft questions which follow.

Spring has come with little prelude, like turning a rocky corner into a sheltered valley, and
gardens and their borders have blossomed suddenly, lush with daffodils, irises, tulips.

Even the derelict houses of Les Maurads are touched with colour, but here the ordered gardens
have run to rampant eccentricity: a root carpeted with dandelions; violets poking out of a
crumbling facade.

Source: from (I'm/Solar by Joanne Harris

1 Explain fully why the writer describes the arrival of spring as ‘like turning a rocky corner
into a sheltered valley’. [2]

2 What effect does the word ‘lush’ have on our picture of spring? [1]

3 What does the writer mean when she describes the roof as being ‘carpeted’ with dandelions? [1

Exercise 8: The New School
Read the passage and answer the writer’s craft questions which follow.

Padma and Rita approached the gates of their new school with some dread and trepidation,
Girls in uniforms identical to theirs snaked in front of them; Padma and Rita envied their
assurance, their composure—this was familiar territory to them, whereas Padma and Rita were
explorers in new territory,

‘There are millions ofthem!’ whispered Rita. ‘Absolutely millionsl’

1 Explain fully what effect is achieved by the word ‘snaked’. [2]

2 In what way were Padma and Rita ‘explorers in new territory’? [2]
3 There could not have been ‘millions’ of girls in the school. Why, then does the writer have

Rita say that there were? [1]

[5 marks]