1 Personal writing

Sometimes the requirement to recount personal experiences is tested directly by essay

titles which require you to write about an experience or occasion that has occurred in your
own life. lfyou decide to tackle such a task, it is worth keeping some guidelines in mind.

It is better to base what you write on something which actually happened rather
than trying to invent a situation and claiming it to be true.

The reader, however, will not know what really happened. So you can elaborate a
little on the details or even combine two actual separate experiences into one.

The reader will not know anything about your personal circumstances. Remember
that you need to provide a context to your account and give some brief information
about other people who were involved.

Rememberyou are at the centre ofthe piece ofwriting u it is important that you
make yourself interesting and communicate the key elements of your personality.

Exercise 1: Crab Racing

Here is an example of a piece of personal writing; the author is writing about an unusual
sporting contest which she witnessed while visiting an island in the Caribbean.

Read it carefully and then make a list of the features which make it an effective piece of personal
writing. In particular comment on how well it fulfils the rules printed above.

Crab racing turned out to be an inspiration. i don’t know how long it had been since the
creatures left their natural habitat but they looked as ifthey had resigned themselves
to their fate. Even if the barrel they had just been taken from contained sea water or,
alternatively, mud from their very own swamp, all memory of home had now gone.

They languished in the afternoon sun as if they hadn’t a care in the world. Since ropes would
be ridiculous on creatures that size, a sturdy piece of string was attached to the anatomy
of each crustacean. The minders spent much time in examining claws and paying attention
to details. in addition to the string, there was a second prop. it was one which could be
described as the urging and steering mechanism~a stick. When the race began i tried not
to rationalize or demand too much logic from what was taking place. But it was madness
to the utmost degree. A number of male adults were holding a piece oistring. At the other
end of the string was a crab. The men were endeavouring to urge the creatures forward at
a satisfactory pace with the aid ofthe stick. One crab was going backwards and continued
to do so regardless ofany attempts to the contrary. Three of them appeared to be moving
diagonally. Two others seemed to be dancing a quadrille.

As always, there was a maverick. Slowly but surely he was inching forward. The crab was
moving slowly but surely towards the finishing line. it was not so much a race as an exercise
in patience. Not far removed from taking your pet snail tor a walk. There was no longer

any reason to scuttle. When you scuttle, you move with some intent to escape. it you

are tethered by a string and the radius ofyour movement is governed by its length, thenf '

 

what’s the point? These crustaceans, in any
case, looked as ifthey no longer knew the
meaning ofthe word scuttle. Even worse,
some seemed to be experiencing difficulty
in moving a claw forward. I didn’t know the
rules of the race. Were there any? Was it my
imagination or did l notice some tugging
on the string? it would obviously serve to
pull the crab forward at a speed not of its
own volition. My eyes were riveted on the
maverick some short distance from the finishing line.

 

The spectators were better behaved than the ones in Trinidad. However, one or two began
voicing their doubts about the precise physical condition of the winner.

<You dirty cheati’
‘The crab dead! All you can’t see the crab dead?!i’

i felt the protesters had a point. The only movement from the crab was the involuntary one
made by any motion otthe string.

‘How ali you people so stupid? All you can’t see the crab already dead when he haui it across
the line?!’

This was very interesting. The crab went into a series ofjerks as the minder worked the string
to demonstrate it was stilt in the land of the living. Alternatively, it could indeed have been
involuntary. Death throes.

‘How man in he right mind go want pin medal on dead crab?!’

Howls of laughter from the spectators. The winner sat unconcerned. Surely rigor mortis had
now set in. At any rate, no attempt was being made to iift a claw in triumphant acclamation
of victory.

‘And i say it dead before it cross the linei’
A number of people formed a circle around the winner. There was much close inspection
going on.

‘He move! i see he movei’ it was confirmed by another person in the circle. There was much
jubilation. Everyone seemed happy. Everyone, that is, except the crab. And while we settled
down to enjoy the rest of the afternoon, l was ieft with my doubts. Was there life in that body
when the first claw slithered across the fine?

Source. from Swim» f2; u Mir/gin; Hem by Amryl Johnson

Here, the writer has chosen to describe her experience of an unusual event e crab racing. She
skilfully captures the atmosphere ofthe occasion, in particularthrough her reproduction of
the speech of the other spectators. However, what makes this a particularly effective account
is the personality ofthe writer: she comes across as being fascinated, amused and a little
bewildered and the informal tone she uses, reinforced by some direct questions, successfully
engages the reader. '

Exercise 2

The following example of a piece of personal writing was produced under time constraints.
Teachers might consider it to be a good piece of work overall.

But, as you will notice when you read it, its structure, expression and the writer’s focus on the topic
could still be improved. The title is: Write about two occasions when you had great fun as a child.

Everybody has a lot of memories to remember, especially those during childhood. Whether
they are sweet or bad memories they remain fresh in our minds. People always say that sweet
memories are hard to forget. i really agree with this statement because we cannot deny it.
Memories will always remain. i want to share with you two occasions when i had great fun as a

young child.7 Personal writing

The first is ofwhen l entered primary school and the second is when my famiiy celebrated my
birthday without my knowing.

1994 was when l entered primary school. When my father drove me to Sunnyside Primary
School i felt very scared because S did not know my new situation and environment. When we

arrived at that school, my feelings changed from scared to excited because the environment of

the school was very beautiful. it was surrounded by many plants and a few metres away from
the school could be seen a beach. The beach is known as Golden Sands Beach.

When i enteredihe class, l saw many children with their own parents. Some of them were
happy because they were goingto meet new friends but others were crying. My mother always

gave me support and encouraged me not to be scared but to be happy at all times. Moreover,
my cousins were in the same class as me. i would soon be making new friends.

As the time passed by, we all got to know each other well and played together. it was a good
ti_me_when i made new friends. Although i am seventeen now: it is hard to forget them
because they were all kind and always helpful to me especially ifl had any difficulties in a
particular subject.

My second occasion when I had great fun as a young child was during the celebrations for my
seventh birthday.0neda beforem birthda came thatisonthe4thA ril1996 itseemed
stran ethatm arentsdid notbrin meandm brothersandsistersto osho in because
usuall beioreabirthda the would brin usto bu stationer and newclothes.

 

 

 

 

My parents went shopping by themselves and when they got home, as usual, they had bought
household goods and new stationery for my brothers and sisters. However, i felt very sad
because they said that they had forgotten to buy new clothes and stationery for me. Because of
my parents’ lack of concern, i cried alone in my room.

Lategweymgjmng ofAQril 5th 1996 as usual myﬁgthers and sisters and I went to school,
and when wacame back home, i was surprised because my parents celebrated my birthday
party and had bought me a chocolate cake. I felt very happy when my parents gave me a big
present that was a bicycle and then held me tightly.

Those are two occasions that were very exciting and fun. i will never forget either of them. They
will always be in my mind.1 Personal writing l

The writer ofthis essay adopts a logical narrative approach to the topic. The content is
relevant and gives a clear account of two separate occasions (although the description of the
birthday celebrations tends to concentrate more on feelings of sadness than fun).

However, the account is a little lacking in excitement and interest; the character of the writer
is not clearly apparent as although he makes an attempt to state his feelings he does not
explore them in any great detail. Similarly, although the written expression is largely accurate,
the vocabulary and sentence structures are a little repetitive and lacking in originality: these
are further reasons why the writer’s personality is not communicated strongly.

Some words and phrases in the essay have been underlined as more suitable expressions
could be put in their place. Rewrite these passages, using words ofyour own, in order to make
the account more interesting orto correct an error of expression.

Exercise 3

Write about your own first day at school (either at primary or secondary school). In particular,
concentrate on describing particular details of the day which remain in your memory and try to
bring out the feelings you had about the experience — be honest in your description; the feelings
can be happy or sad.

h“
Tools for personal writing

The key to effective personal writing lies in:
i the selection and treatment of a suitable episode (or episodes) to describe
ii the way you present yourself as narrator.

Questions that ask for a piece of personal writing will usually suggest that you write about a
specific occasion in your life, for example: Describe an occasion when you tried to be helpful
but things went wrong. It is important that you focus what you write closely on what the
question requires and avoid producing a mini— autobiography. You should not attempt to
describe too complicated an event when writing under time constraints.

However, when thinking about approaching a personal writing task such as the one above,
once you have decided on the episode about which you plan to write, you will need to make
certain decisions.

o Whatshalllwrite about?

- How do I describe the event? Will i describe it exactly in the order it happened, or should i
start from the disastrous conclusion and work back to the beginning?

- How much information do i need to give to provide the context for the episode?

- How will i conclude the account? Should I stop at the point when things went wrong or
should I finish with saying what i learned from the experience?

- How much space should i give to describing what other people said and did?
- Should i treat the episode as comic or serious?

- Ifl decide to be humorous, how can i make it funny forthe reader?

All of these are the sort ofquestions any thoughtful writer is likely to ask before beginning
to write. There are, of course, no right or wrong answers. What is important is that you, as
a writer, should have thought ofthese (or similar points) and used them to ensure that
whatever approach you take will provide an account which is consistent and convincing.1 Personal writing

R
Humour

Personal essay topics frequently allow the opportunity for writers to approach the account
oftheir chosen episode in a humorous way. It is perfectly acceptable to take such an
approach, but try to avoid being too heavy—handed in trying to communicate what you
think might be funny.

It is likely that the events described are amusing in themselves — the most effective comic
writing comes from the style ofthe writer and the language in which they are described: very
often an understated approach is the most effective. The humour achieved by writers is very
much dependent on the way they present their personalities as part of their narrative.

Exercise 4
Here are some possible answers to the questions posed above; write your own essay based on them.

o I’ll describe the time i tried to cook the dinner and nearly set the house on fire.

Perhaps i could start at the end with an opening sentence such as: ‘Never again,’ i thought as i
gazed at the smoke-filled chaos which had once been mother’s beloved kitchen.

o l’d better give a bit of background: how old I was; why I thought it would be a good idea to help
outwith the cooking. I did it as a surprise for Mum and Dad who were out at work. My elder
sister was looking after me but she was on the phone with her friends.

- i think the approach I’m taking will allow me to make a reflective conclusion—things wouldn‘t
have gone wrong ifl hadn’t left everything cooking in the kitchen to watch my favourite TV
programme. Perhaps I could finish with my sister being blamed for the whole episode as she
wasn’t keeping her eye on me!

- I think I’ll keep what other people said and did to the minimum—that will give greater emphasis
to what Mum and Dad said when they saw what had happened.

- I think humour will provide the best approach. i need to concentrate on describing the things
that went wrong in preparing the meal (upsetting bowls of flour etc.) as well as the final
disaster. The most effective approach will be to present myself as well meaning and naive and
not really understanding how i finished up producing so much chaos.

a
Reading for enjoyment

Here is an example ofa piece ofhumorous personal writing. it is taken from Gerald Durrell’s
autobiography ‘My Fomi/y and OtherAn/‘mo/s’. Durrell became a famous naturalist and in
this book he describes how his interest in living creatures was formed in his childhood on
the Greek island of Corfu. In this episode, he describes how he unwittingly caused chaos

at lunchtime by leaving a matchbox containing a mother scorpion and her babies on the
mantelpiece. The other characters in this account are his mother; his brothers Larry and
Leslie; his sister Margo; the family maid Lugaretzia and Gerald’s dog, Roger. Much ofthe
humour derives from the way in which the author builds disaster on top of disaster and
describes it using an understated narrative voice. This is a very effective piece of humorous,
personal writing; as you read it, consider closely how the different aspects ofthe passage
combine to produce an overall description ofchaos and confusion.‘ 7 Personal writing i

 

Lunch-time with scorpions

Then one ciay i iounci a fat female scorpion in the wall, wearing what at first glance appeareo' 
be a pale fawn tor coat. Closer inspection proved that this strange garment was made up oi 
mass of tiny babies clinging to the mother’s back, i was enraptored by this family, and i made it
my mind to smuggle them into the house and tip to my bedroom so that ! might keep them 
watch them grow up. With infinite care l manoeuvred the mother and family into a matchbox,
and then htirrieci to the villa. it was rather unfortunate thatjust as i entered the door lunch
should be served; l’iowever', l placed the matchbox carefully on the mantelpiece in the draining
room) so that the scorpions should get plenty of air, and made my way to the dining—room and
jomeol the fam‘ly for the meal Dansclling over my food; ieeo‘ing Roger surreptitiously under the
table and listening to the family arguing, i completely forgot about any exciting new captures.

at last Larry> having "finished, fetched the cigarettes from the drawingroom, and lying back in
his chair he put one in his mouth and picked up the matchbox he had brought. Oblivious of my
impending doom l watched him interestedly as, still talking glibiy, he opened the matchbox.

 

NOW l maintain to this day that the female scorpion meant no harm. She was agitated and a trifle
annoyed at being shot: up in  matchbox for so long, and so she seized the first opportonit;r to
“he hoiste iherseli out o‘i‘the be}: with great rapioity, her babies clinging on desperatelys
 scottled on to the back  Larry’s hand, it ere, not quite certain what to do next, she

" lowed Lip  the ready. Larry; ieeling the movement oi  claws, glanced

‘ 3, and from that moment things got increasingly coniosed.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

‘ i orer  plate and brought ""oger out irom
, , , b . .  hand, tarry sent the onlortonate scorpion
ilyihg clown the liable, and she landed midway between Margo and Leslie? scattering babies
 conretti as  thornpeo on the cloth Thoroughly enraged   treatment, the creature
sped towards Leslie,‘ a oieering with emotion. Leslie leapt to his feet) overturning

net’s“ |
erote gr with his napkin, sending the scorpion rolling across
r; a '

 
     

3435/.
l

 
 
  
 

 

his chair, ario iiickeci out v”
,  ‘ '

 

the scorpions advancew
‘ . eraser missed the animal corrlpietely, but: soccessiully

ble to stand col teeter, on}er tlyl st her breath and sat

5.4“7 PBI'SlIlIﬂI writing

gasping at the end of the table, unable even to protest. The scorpion had now gone to ground
under Leslieis plate, while her babies swarmed wildly all over the table. Roger, mystified by the
panic, but determined to do his share, ran round and round the room, barking hysterically.

‘lt’s that boy again . . .’ bellowed Larry.
‘Look out! Look outi They’re comingl’ screamed Margo.
‘nll we need is a book,’ roared Leslie; ‘don’t panic, hit ‘em with a book.’

‘What on earth’s the matter with you all?’ Mother kept imploring, mopping her glasses. ‘lt’s that
boy  he’ll kili the lot of us “took at the table  knee—deep in scorpions...”

‘Quick  quick  do something  took out, look out l’

‘Stop screeching and get a book, for God’s sake Youire worse than the dog  ‘Shut up, Roger.’
‘By the Grace oiGod E wasn’t bitten ’

‘Look out  there’s another one  Quick  quick.’

‘Oh, shut up and get me a book or something}

‘But how did the scorpions get on the table, clear?”

‘That boy  Every matchbox in the house is a deathtrap ’

‘Look out, it’s coming towards me  Quick, quick, do something

‘Hit it with your knife  your knife ...Go on, hit it 

Since no one had bothered to explain things to him, Roger was underthe mistaken impression
that the family were being attacked, and that it was his duty to defend them. As Lugaretzia
was the only stranger in the room, he came to the logical conclusion that she must be the
responsible party, so he hit her in the ankle This did not help matters very much.

By the time a certain amount of order had been restored, all the baby scorpions had hidden
themselves under various plates and bits of cutlery. Eventually, after impassioned pleas on my
part, backed up by Mother, Leslie’s suggestion that the whole lot be slaughtered was quashed.
While the family, still simmering with rage and fright, retired to the drawing—room, i spent

half an hour rounding up the babies, picking them up in a teaspoon, and returning them to
their mother’s back. Then l carried them outside on a saucer and, with the utmost reluctance,
released them on the garden wall. Roger and l went and spent the afternoon on the hillside, tor
l felt it would be prudent to allow the family to have a siesta before seeing them again.

Source: from My Fain/ll and Other/inimols by Gerald Durrel

Finally, here is a selection of personal essay titles similar to those that you might be
given in an examination. Choose one and write between 350 and 500 words.

1
2

3
4

5

Write about some of the things that make you happy and relaxed at the end oia school day,
What changes have you seen in yourschool since you joined it?

Describe the biggest challenge in your life.

Describe a day when you were very unhappy.

Describe a special family celebration when things went unexpectedly wrong.

l
l
l
i