74

Writing: FI‘BIIIIGHIIV
asked [IIIBSliOIIS

Question

How will it affect my performance if I write less than the recommended word
limits?

Answer

Answers which are slightly less than the recommended number of words might be
acceptable overall but such answers are likely to be self—penalising as ideas may not be
developed fully. This could result in your work being considered less successful than if it
had been ofthe required length.

This principle applies to both Directed Writing and Composition.

Question

How will it affect my performance if my answers are longer than the recommended
word limits?

Answer

it is likely that by writing too much, especially for Composition, you will penalise yourself.
When you are writing under time constraints, the more you write, the less time you will
have for planning and checking your work. This means that there is a greater chance of
making careless mistakes ofwritten expression which the teacher will not accept or excuse.
Remember, also, that ifyou write too much for the Directed Writing task, you will leave
yourself insufficient time to produce an adequate response forthe task in Composition.

Question
Will every spelling and punctuation mistake I make affect my performance?

Answer

No. Your writing is likely to be assessed by the overall impression in which the teacher
takes into account the linguistic competence you display as well as the relevance and
interest of what you write.

The more easily you communicate your meaning to the teacher, the better impression

it will make on him/her. However, ifyour answer contains so many errors ofexpression,
punctuation and spelling that the teacher’s understanding ofwhat you want to say is
impeded and she or he has to re—read whatyou have written to make sense out of it, then
it will affect your performance negatively.i
l
l
i

 

Writinn: Frenuemlv asked uuestions

Question

If I write a really interesting and exciting story, will this compensate for making
spelling and grammatical mistakes?

Answer
Only to some extent. The main purpose ofthe writing task is to assess your linguistic

competence; ifyour expression is not secure, then you will not be fully successful in conveying
an exciting piece of work.

Remember that you can make what you write interesting by successful vocabulary choices
and controlled, positive punctuation Do not try to write something which is too ambitious;
you will run into difficulties with time.

Question
If I’m not sure how to spell a word, but think it is the best one to use, should I use it
anyway?

Answer

The spelling errors which are most serious are those where you misspell simple vocabulary
(eg. freind, dinning room) or when you misspell the same word in different ways in different
parts ofyour essay. An occasional error in spelling, where otherwise your use ofa word is
correct and appropriate, might be excused by teachers.

Question
How are the Directed Writing tasks assessed by teachers?

Answer

Overall, the linguistic qualities teachers usually look for are very similar to those required for
the essay in Composition.

However, for Task Fulfilment there will be a particular emphasis on how well your answer
suits the purpose ofthe task, for example, ifyou are required to write a friendly letter, it is
important that you write in an appropriate tone and are not overly formal; ifyou are asked

to write a newspaper report, then you should show an awareness of the common features of
journalistic style, etc. How effectively you incorporate and develop the three content points in
your answer is also a very important consideration in this.

Question
How much detail should I give to making the content points?

Answer

It is not enough tojust mention the points. Your work must show that you have fully
understood the points. This means that you should develop each point sufficiently to show
that it has been made clearly. When you are planning your answerfor Directed Writing, it is a
good idea to use the content points as the basis of your plan so that you can give a clear focus
to each point and make it an essential part ofyour answer. Rememberto be precise; ifyou are
asked to give the date when an event occurred, do notjust write something general like ‘last
week’ as this is unlikely to provide sufficiently detailed information; the actual day and date
would be much more useful.

 

i:

I