130

 

Exercise 1: Julia

10

She had lived most of her life alone. Her mother had borne her late in life and Julia believed
that, and the strain oftrying to please her tyrannical father, had probably contributed to her
mother’s early death. When her mother died, a few weeks after her sixtieth birthday, Julia
was not quite fifteen.

She had escaped from her father as soon as she could, going to Girton College} Cambridge
on a scholarship, which paid her way. Although he had tried to make her departure from the
family home as unpleasant as possible, there was not much he could do to prevent it and
once away from him a part of her had felt she could never again face living with another man.

There had been female friends, such as Vera, and there had been Harriet whom, she now
concluded, pounding the streets, she had not treated as well as she could have done. Harriet
had been more than a friend; but: blindly, she had taken Harriet for granted. Yet she had
loved Harriet, she now knew, and she knew it because she had learned to love someone else.

if you spend most of your life alone often you do not know that you are lonely. it was not
until the ‘discovery’ that Julia Garnet knew that she was lonely and that she had been so for
most other life.

Source: horn Miss (in/net Mngei by Salley‘vickers

Give two reasons given by the writer to explain why Julia’s mother died relatively young.

Number your answer (i) and (ii). [2]
How old was Julia when her mother died? [1]
What one piece of information are we given about the behaviour ofJulia’s father which

suggests that Julia did not have a good relationship with him? [1]
Why was Julia’s father unable to prevent her taking up her university place? [1]
Once she left home, what effect did Julia’s relationship with her father have on her? [1]
What two aspects of her relationship with Harriet does Julia now regret? Number your

answers (i) and (ii). [2]
What does the word ‘blindly’ suggest about Julia’s behaviour towards Harriet? [1]
How does Julia now know that she loved Harriet? [1]

According to the writer, what often happens to people who live most oftheir lives alone? [1]

Why do you think the writer begins and ends the extract with a reference to the fact
thatJulia haslived most of herlife alone? [1]

[12 marks]l 21 MDI'B BXOIGISOS In Illoral and lnlmntlal comnronanslon 1
Exercise 2: Selling the Flat

There were matters to attend to: the solicitors, MrAkbar. And it’s right too, she thought, as the
plane taxied out and up and over the sea. There is a life to close down.

London was dirty and hot after a cold July, and Ealing particularly stuffy. Mr Akbar, however,
was overjoyed to see her.

‘Madam, come in, come in,’ he gestured hospitably down her own hall. ‘lt is wonderful that you
have come.’

 

He made her sweet mint tea and they sat on the balcony overlooking the gardens. The gardens,
which had been a source ofjoy to Julia during her years at Cedar Court, looked seedy: the turf
parched and the flowerbeds municipal.

‘These i love,’ said Mr Akbar, pointing at a pair of bedraggled mallard ducks which had
wandered onto the lawns.

‘Do you, MrAkbar? Then l am happy you are going to buy my flat.’
‘You accept my price?”

Julia had taken the precaution ofvisiting a local estate agency before their meeting and
had gleaned that the sum he was offering was rather below the market value. She had come
intending to be firm on this point.

But the eyes of MrAkbar, looking pleadingly at her, made her waver.

She had bought the flat for a good price after the original landlord died, leaving her as the
sitting tenant. it seemed greedy to take advantage now of her own good fortune and besides,
had MrAkbar not made overtures to her she might never have had the idea to sell up. He did
not have the appearance of wealth.

And the hassle of selling the place elsewhere would delay her. Anyway, she owed him
something for putting the idea of her permanent remove to Venice into her head.
Source: from Miss Garner’s/Angel by Salley Vickers

1 Julia plans to ‘close down’ her life in London. What is the first thing she has to do? [1

2 Give three pieces of evidence to suggest that Mr Akbar ‘was overjoyed to see’ Julia.
Number your answers (i), (ii) and (iii). [3’

3 Mr Akbar and Julia ‘sat on the balcony’. How can you tell that Julia’s feelings about her

 

former home have changed? . [1
4 How does the writer make it clear from his description ofthe gardens that the weather
was hot? [1
5 Why might it be surprising that Mr Akbar loves the ducks? [1
6 What had Julia discovered when she visited the local estate agent? [1
7 Before she came to visit Mr Akbar, what had Julia planned to do when it came to selling
the house to him? [1
8 What made Julia change her mind about her earlier decision? [1
9 (i) What had been Julia’s ‘good fortune’? (ii) Whose idea has it been to sell the flat in the
first place? [2
10 Apart from the difficulty involved in selling her flat to someone else, give two reasons
why Julia decides to accept MrAkbar’s offer. Number your answers (i) and (ii). [2
[14 marks

Exercise 3: Anna’s Journey

‘Just remember, Anna, your father and l are very proud of you.’ Her mother’s words to her
before she left rang in Anna’s ears and she felt tears prick her eyes. She forced herself to
stop thinking about her mother, afraid of making a spectacle of herself in such a public place
as an airport.

Her heart sank when she realised that there were crowds of people waiting to have their
passports checked, in a state of great anxiety, she chose what seemed to be the shortest

131l 21 More GXBI'GiSES ill literal and inferential comprehension l

132

queue, and fished in her overloaded handbag for her passport. Panicking, she was convinced
she had lost it, only seconds later to find it. All around her were people ofdifferent nationalities
united in their common purpose ~ to have their passports checked as soon as possible, leave 1
the bustle ofthe airport and enter the country.

‘Now for my baggage,’ thought Anna, following the appropriate airport signs. Her mother had
told her that all the suitcases from her aircraft would be placed on a moving conveyor belt, and
that she would have to identify and retrieve her own suitcase from among all the others. Anna
searched for her own suitcase, but with no success. Bags were collected, people came and
went, until Anna was left standing tearfully in an empty hall.

By now she had been spotted by a uniformed official. ‘Please come with me,’ he said to Anna,
not unkindly, leading her to a little office, where he picked up a pen and printed form. Clearly
this was mere routine for him. ‘Now, please give me details about your missing bag — make,
colour, size.’ Because she was by now wildly agitated, Anna’s mind had gone blank and she was
unable to answer any ofthese questions. With a disdainful sigh, the official informed herthat
when her baggage was traced it would be delivered to the city address which Anna was able ~
miraculously, his look suggested « to give him. He glanced at his watch and sighed again.

When she reached the student accommodation, she was disappointed that no suitcase awaited 
her in her room, although she consoled herself with the thought that, given the time~scale, i
this was hardly surprising. She surveyed the tiny room which was to be her home for at least t'
the next year. it seemed so empty and unfriendly after the warmth of home. ‘Perhaps i shall

feel better about it in the morning,’ thought Anna, as she climbed into bed. The last thing she
remembered before sleep overtook her was an ache of homesickness in the pit of her stomach,

in the morning, she felt considerably brighter and searched in her handbag for clean clothes and
toiletries, determined to make the most of her free day by investigating her new environment.
The coolness inside provided a refreshing change to the heat outside. Dizzily scanning the
buildings, Anna could appreciate why they were called skyscrapers. People surged past, their
faces set impassively, as they hurried towards their destinations. Cars gave off clouds of exhaust
fumes as they inched along the road, their drivers tapping their fingers in impatience on the
steering wheels. The traffic lights changed; Anna was propelled across the road by the crowd
standing on the pavement, and found herselfoutside a huge covered market.

There was an aroma of spices and fruit, and the sound ofvoices echoed around the high
space. Fearfully, Anna took the precaution ofclutching her bag tightly as she walked around,
nevertheless relishing the vastness ofthe market and the variety of goods on display. By

now, it was raining outside. People pushed into the market, many with newspapers over their
heads, rain running in little rivers from their chins, their hair, their sandals. A queue for taxis
had formed and people edged to the front of it, watching intently every vehicle that screeched
round the corner. The sun blazed down again and steam hissed up from the pavement. it

was time for Anna to go back to her little room. ‘Back home? she wondered, amazed at the ‘
difference a day could make. As she opened the door of her room, she found that she was not . 
entirely alone. Standing in the middle of her floor, with make, colour and size clear to see, was i
the suitcase she had lost the previous day. Happily, Anna went downstairs to phone her mother.

Whatdid Anna fear she might do to draw attention to herself? [1] 

Give two reasons which might explain why Anna was unable to find her passport 7.
immediately. [2]

When dealing with her missing baggage, the uniformed official showed two separate
attitudes to Anna. What were these two attitudes? Number your answers (i) and (ii). [2]

Anna was ‘disappointed that no suitcase awaited her in her room’. Why do you think this
was an unreasonable reaction? [1]

‘People surged past, their faces set Impassively’. What two impressions of city people do

you think this suggests? In your answer, do not copy from the passage. [2]

Why were the car drivers impatient? [1]

Anna was fearful as she walked around the market. What was she afraid of? [l] i

Suggest two reasons why Anna went ‘happily’ to phone her mother. [2] 
[12 marks] ‘

mlapted from r ammunitgi‘ (i i iii/vi li'rwl/ Li.r/I(,‘J.l{l’.'i" j  [lurk J  Cl}. 0.2/1, ()3ng Q‘Ti’). Q’w, 0/. iVowwn/Jur2006