11 choosing vocabulary
suited to its nurnose

In summary writing, and indeed in all writing, you must choose a vocabulary which is
suited to its purpose and audience. You had an opportunity to consider appropriate
vocabulary, tone and register in earlier chapters in this book which dealt with Composition
and Directed Writing. The matter ofvocabulary, tone and register is more complex in
Writingthan it is in Reading This is because you might be writing to amuse or entertain,
orto persuade and argue, or to reflect on past events; you might be writing a letter, or a
report, where the purpose and audience are given in the rubric of Directed Writing.

However, choosing vocabulary suited to its purpose is much simpler in Reading.

You might be relieved to know that in comprehension questions teachers focus on reading
rather twan writing, and so there are usually no penalties forthe wrong type ofvocabulary
(provided, of course, that the sense is clear), tone or register. The part of Reading where
vocabu ary, tone and register become important is the summary question, and this is
relative y straightforward because the golden rule is formality.

A defini:ion offormal language is probably best given by a definition ofwhat it is not.
Signposts of informality are chatty or conversational language or tone, abbreviations or
contrac:ions, the active rather than the passive voice ofthe verb and the use of direct
speech. So, signposts offormal language could be seen as being:

 

no cwatty or conversational language or tone, for example, ‘It is clearto see that 
ratherthan ‘Let’s be clear about . . .’

- no abbreviations or contractions, for example, ‘Coral reefs cannot be looked after if
 ratherthan ‘Coral reefs can’t be looked after if . . .’

- the passive rather than the active voice of the verb, for example, ‘It can be seen that’
ratherthan ‘I can see that.’

- no direct speech, for example, ‘The captain said that the crew should go to the
lighthouse’, ratherthan ‘ l am goingto the lighthouse,’ the captain said.

- no slang or colloquial expressions, for example, ‘The children thought that their
teacherwas efficient and friendly’, rather than ‘The kids thought that their teacher
was cool’.11 BIIOOSIIIH vocabulary suited to “8 numose l

Exercise 1
Working with a partner, look at:
l a copy of a novel, either your own or from the class or school library, and

2 a more formal text of your own choice, which can be a non—fiction text such as an instruction
manual, an autobiography or a book designed to give information on a particular topic.

From these texts, write down ten examples of informal language and ten examples offormal
language. Beside each example, write a sentence or two to explain why your choices of exampleS
are either formal or informal language.

 

informal Language Formal Language

 

,.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

lO.

 

 

 

114