For each of the exercises which follow:

read the passage carefully twice
- answer the questions by lifting (do not try to use own words at this stage)
- answer the questions in sentences, but do not waste time copying out question stems

- be careful that what you lift does not include extra information which might
distort your answer or prevent the question from being ansWered.

Exercise 1: Grandfather’s Study

 

in Pappachi’s study? mounted butterflies and moths had disintegrated into small heaps of
iridescent dust that powdered the bottom of their glass display cases, leaving the pins that
had impaled them. Cruel. The room was rank with fungus and disease.

Rahei {on a stool, on top ofa table} rummaged in a book cupboard with doll) dirty glass
panes. Her bare footprints were clear in the dust on the floor, They led from the door to the

table (dragged to the bookshelf} to the stool {dragged to the table and lifted onto it}. She
was iooking for something.On the top shelf, the leather binding of grandfather’s set of "the insect Wealth of india’ had i
lifted off each book and buckled like corrugated asbestos. Silverfish tunnelled through the
pages, burrowing arbitrarily from species to species, turning organised information into yellow
lace. Rahei groped behind the row of books and brought out hidden things. A smooth seasheil '
and a spiky one. A plastic case for contact lenses. An orange pipette.

the same idea. She brought it out and wiped the dust off with the sleeve of her shirt. it was a i ‘
flat packet wrapped in clear plastic and stuck with Sellotape. A scrap of white paper inside is
said ‘Esthappen and Rahel’. in Ammuis writing. There were four tattered notebooks in it.
Source horn The one" iii/mil Things by Arundhati Roy

Behind the books, Rahel’s puzzled fingers encountered something else. Another magpie had f
l

1 What had happened to Grandfather’s collection of moths? [1] 
2 Where inthe study had Grandfatherkept his collection of moths? [1} ‘
3 Apart from the dead moths,what else aboutthe study might have made Raheldislike it? [1]
4 The cupboard had ‘dirty glass panes’. What else was dirty? [1]
5 How had Rahelgot the table to the bookshelf? [1i
6 How had Rahelgot the stoolon to the table? [1]  s
7 Explain fully what had happened to Grandfather’s set of books entitled ‘Thelnsect H
Wealth oflndia’. [2]
8 Whatdid Rahelhave to doto retrieve the‘hidden things’? [1]
9 Explain fully how you can tell that the notebooks had been hidden by Ammu. [2]
10 Explain fully how you can tellthat the notebooks were important to Ammu. [2] l
[13 marks]

 

Exercise 2: The Brazilian Rain Forest

Once a year the skies of western
Brazil grow dark by day as well

as by night. Farmers and cattle
owners burn down vast areas of
the great rain forests around the
riverAmazon to clear land for
crop—growing and cattie rearing.
Smoke from the tires biots out

the sun. Scientistss now keenly
aware of the dangers to the earth’s
environment. see this great annual
destruction as a major peril for
Brazii, and also for the rest oithe
world. Politicians have joined
scientists to try to stop the foolish waste oi the precious resources of the planet.

  

   

For more than tour hundred years settiers and farmers have been attacking Brazil’s forests in l 3;
one way or another. They tried to snatch land for themseives from the seemingly indestructible
jungles, but their power oi recovery defeated their efforts. New trees continually filled in the l 2
small patches of land that they cleared. Nowadays, modern machinery can cut down trees at i J
an alarming speed, and the controlled burning down of the forests has meant, that areas laer l [j

0c.
than some whole countries have been permanently stripped bare.

One result oi this destruction is becoming alarmingly obvious. The forests contain an
astonishing variety of animal and piant iiie which is siowly but surely disappearing. Gne type of
tree may maintain more than four hundred insect species? each square kilometre orr forest its
own assortment oi birds and rnamrnais.

 

initially" ham  2 4. our?" An Eur/ow E i W). by A R l'lcilillifly ionisori

13723 More exorclsas In Ilﬂlnu l

138

 

1 Once a year, what is unusual about the skies of western Brazil?
2 Why do farmers and cattle—owners burn down the forests? l
3 in the first paragraph, what evidence does the writer give to suggest that vast areas are
burned? 1
4 Explain fully why scientists are worried about the burning ofthe forests. 2
5 How can you tell that politicians agree with scientists? l
6 is the destruction ofthe forests a new phenomenon? Give a reason for your answer. 1
7 What feature of the jungles meant that settlers were unable ‘to snatch land for themselves’,
and what evidence of this feature does the writer give to support his claim? 2
8 In the second paragraph, what evidence does the writer give to suggest that vast areas
are burned? 1
9 Apart from burning down forests, how else is land obtained for farmers and cattle owners? 1
10 What is ‘one result’ of the destruction of the forests? 1

 

 

[12 marks

Exercise 3: Estha and Rahel

They were nearly born on a bus, Estha and Rahei. The car in which Baba, their father, was
taking Ammu, their mother, to hospital in Shillong to have them broke down on the winding tea
estate road in Assam. They abandoned the car and flagged down a crowded State Transport
bus. With the queer compassion of the very poor forthe comparatively well off, or perhaps
only because they saw how hugely pregnant Ammu was, seated passengers made room for
the couple and for the rest of thejourney Estha and Rahel’s father had to hold their mother’s
wobbling stomach (with them in it) to prevent it from wobbling.

According to Estha, ifthey’d been born on the bus, they’d have got free bus rides forthe rest of
their lives. it wasn’t clear where he’s got this information from, or how he knew these things,
but for years the twins harboured a faint resentment against their parents for having diddled
them out of a lifetime of free bus rides.

They also believed that if they were killed on a zebra crossing, they’d have got free bus rides for

l the rest of their lives.They had the definite impression that that was what zebra crossings were

meant for. Free funerals. Ofcourse there were no zebra crossings to get killed on in Ayamenem,
or, for that matter, even in Kottayam, which was the nearest town, but they’d seen some from
the car window when they went to Cochin, which was a two hour drive away.

Source: from The God omea/l Things by Arundhati Roy

 

1 Where were Estha and Rahel’s parents going when their car broke down? 1
2 How did they complete theirjourney after the car broke down? 1
3 Why might we be surprised that the passengers on the bus felt sorry for Baba and Ammu? l
4 Why might we expect the passengers on the bus to feel sorry for Baba and Ammu? l
5 Why did Baba have to hold Ammu’s stomach on the busjourney? [l
6 What did Estha think would have happened if he and his sister had been born on the bus? 1
7 How did Estha know what would have happened if he and his sister had been born on
the bus? 1
8 Why did the twins feel resentful towards their parents? 1
9 According to the twins, what was the advantage of being killed on azebra crossing? l
10 Why were the twins unlikely to be killed on a zebra crossing? [l
[10 marksl 23 More exercises in lining l

Exercise 4: The Domestication of Animals

There are thousands of species of
wild animals, and yet surprisingly
few, for example the goat and the
cow, have been domesticated.

The reason is that it takes special
qualities to make animals suitable
for domestication. They must be
strong enough to withstand removal
from their mother at an early age
and find food for themselves so

that her milk can be used for human
consumption. They must breed
freely in captivity — a guarantee
that the farmer has a living —~ and be
easy to look after. Domestic or farm
animals must be able to develop a
liking for man, enjoy comfort, and accept confinement and control. And, of course, they must
be useful: primarily as a source of food, but also in the provision ofwool or hide for clothing
and sometimes as a means of transport or pulling power.

   

Animals suitable for domestication only emerged with the spread of grass. Millions of years
ago, the world’s rainfall decreased, forests diminished, low-growing plants appeared, then
grass, and, with them, grazing animals developed. Thus sheep and antelope appeared on the
scene, followed by cows, goats and horses. Not until about 10,000 years ago did man develop
l the idea of taking animals into captivity. There was wild game in abundance, so what prompted
l the idea?

it could have come naturally from his experience as a nomadic hunter. As he followed his prey
on their yearly migrations he gradually began to inﬂuence their movements and behaviour

in certain situations. For example, some animals would be driven into a narrow, steepsided
valley where they could more easily be rounded up and some ofthem slaughtered. Or perhaps
theidea arose out of keeping young animals as pets. Predators trying to steal food from the
hunters’ camp were fed by the men and encouraged to become part of the community: the
predator changed into the pet.

Source: Adapted from Ammo/ on the Form by Judy Urquhart

 

1 According to the passage, what do the goat and the cow have in common? 1
2 Why are domestic animals taken from their mothers atan early age? [1
3 Why do animals removed from their mothers at an early age have to be strong? 1
4 Whatmust happen to ensure that the farmer makesa living? 1
5 What are the three uses to which domestic animals can be put? Number your answers (i),
(ii) and (iii). 3
6 What is the main reason forthe development ofdomestic animals? 1
7 What two things happened after the forests diminished which led to grazing animals?
Number your answers (i) and (ii). 2
8 According to the writer, why might we be surprised that man started to take animals into
captivity? l
9 What did early man do which shows he wasa ‘nomadic hunter’? 1,
10 What was the advantage ofdriving animals into a ‘narrow, steep—sided valley’? 1
11 Why did men feed predators which were trying to steal their food? 1
[14 marks

 

139