Another type of question which tests your ability both to appreciate ways in which
writers make use of language and to evaluate information is the quotation question. in a
quotation question, you are asked to ﬁnd a word or expression in the text which means
the same as another word or expression which comes either from the text or which is a
synonym provided by the writer ofthe question.

Example 1: The Beauty ofAnimals

Read the short passage and answerthe question which follows.

 

\é’y‘henever  see pictures of animals 0 look at  in a 200; we are  amazeo bx: their
a ‘ ’

beaut s. The tir‘en with black and \ eliox; stir: es, is a ru v ma, nii‘iceni’. creature, while the
53 J
P28 Quotation questions and VDGIIIIIIIII'U llllﬂSliﬂllS ’

158

Question: Write down one word which emphasises the writer’s admiration of
animals’ beauty.

The key word in the question is the word ‘admiration’, which means wonder and delight. W
must therefore scrutinise the text carefully to find a link with wonder and delight, linked to
‘beauty’, another important word in the question.

Reading the text with ‘wonder’ and ‘beauty’ at the front of our minds enables us to home in
on ‘amazed’ and ‘magniﬁcent’ and ‘eye—catching’. Any ofthese words, in fact, is sufficient to
answerthe question.

Another important factor in giving a correct answer here is to look at the rubric carefully for
what we are being asked to give as an answer. ln this particular question, the rubric asks for
one word.

Consequently, the answers ‘amazed by their beauty’ or ‘equally eye—catching’ are incorrect)
because they infringe the rubric, i.e. they do not give the answer asked for. It is a pity that

such answers would fail to impress the teachers even when there is clearly understanding
behind them.

Exercise 1: The Rain Forests
Read the short passage and answer the questions which follow.

Scientists, now keenly aware of dangers to the earth’s environment, see the destruction of the
rain forests as a major perit for Brazii and also for the rest ofthe world.

Politicians havejoined scientists to try to stop the foolish waste of the precious resources of
these forests,

1 What two consecutive words in the passage tell us that scientists are not lacking in

knowledge about what is happening to the rain forests? [1]

2 Pick out and write down the single word in the passage which tells us that the writer
I thinks that the destruction ofthe rain forests is silly. [l]
[2 marks]

Exercise 2: Climate Change
Read the short passage and answer the questions which follow.

Even more alarming is the threat to

the world’s climate. The burning ofthe
trees accelerates the warming up ofthe
earth’s atmosphere, which scientists
say will bring dramatic changes to our
climate.

Moreover, the blazing torches of the
jungle will add to the harmful gases that
cars and modern industries are pouring
into the air we breathe.

 

1 What single word in the passage tells us that the earth’s atmosphere is getting warmer

and warmer? [l]

2 Pick out and write down an expression from the passage which tells us that the burning
forests are both bright and hot. [2]
[3 marks]i
i

l 28 Quotation questions and vocabulary questions 

Read the short passage and answer the questions which follow.

Exercise 3: Amy

The next moment, though, she saw something more reassuring. in the far corner of the cave a
large white cloth screen was being erected, musicians were gathering and people were taking
their places for some sort of show.

An old man made his entrance by the side of the screen, dressed in a tattered, grimy cloak.
But it was his intense expression that startled Amy. Herfeelings of uneasiness returned as she
watched him gaze round the audience.

1 Amy saw something ‘reassuring’. What single word used later in the passage shows that
later she was no longer feeling reassured?

[l]

2 Pick out and write down the single word which shows that the old man’s clothes were dirty. ll]

[2 marks]

Exercise 4: After the Show
Read the short passage and answer the questions which follow.

The audience broke into a stuttering applause, clearly moved by the realism of the contest.
The old man appeared by the side ofthe screen, holding up the two puppets, the fighters in

the grim contest. One of the puppets bore a fearful resemblance to the old man’s assistant, the
little boy with his large, sad eyes.

Amy panicked wildly. She ran outside, stumbling down the steps, blundering past the crowd,
desperate to get away from the ghastly presence in the cave.

1 Write down one word which shows us that the audience did not start to clap at once after
the show.

[ll
2 Amy ‘ran outside’. Write down two separate words which show that she was frightened
as she ran.

[2]
[3 marks]

Vocabulary Questions

In this type of question, you will be asked to think about a word or phrase in the fiction
passage you have read and work out its meaning. You will have four possible answers to

consider before choosing which ofthese has the same meaning that the word or phrase has
in the passage.

You may be absolutely certain which is the correct answer, and you are fortunate ifthat is so. ‘
However, you may be uncertain and, ifthat is the case, there are several useful steps to use to

approach this question. It may be useful to use these steps to confirm your choice even if you
feel sure your choice is correct.

Step 1: check the context of the word or phrase. The context is the area around the word or

phrase, and the key to understanding may lie in the passage before rather than after the word
orphrase in the question.

Step 2: read carefully the passage in the area ofthe word or phrase, substituting each ofthe
four options to decide which ofthese gives a synonym for the sense ofthe original passage.

Step 3: think of another part ofspeech linked to the word in the question. For example, you
may be unsure what the noun ‘drama’ means, but moving on the adjective linked to the word,
namely ‘dramatic’ may help to clarify the meaning ofthe noun.

15928 Quotation questions and vocabulary [IIIGSIiOIIS l

160

Exercise 5: Keeping Pets
Read the passage, the question and the commentary below.

It is a curious thing, but when you keep animals as pets you imagine they Will behave exan

ya
you would like them to. S

Question
For the word below, tick the option (A, B, C or D) which has the same meaning that the word has in
the passage.

Curious

A fascinating B inquisitive C strange D obvious

Step 1 suggests we look at the context, both before and after the word tested. There is no
text before the word ‘curious’ and so we are able to look only at the passage afterthe Word
‘curious’. The word’ but’ suggests an element ofsurprise in the fact that pet owners would
expect animals to behave as humans do.

When we try Step 2, and substitute ‘inquisitive’ into the passage, it doesn’t seem to make
much sense; although we may know that curious can mean the same as ‘inquisitive’, it is
difficult to see that ‘inquisitive’ is a synonym here. When we substitute ‘obvious’ it doesn’t
seem to fit with the element ofsurprise we have identified. That leaves us with ‘fascinating’;
perhaps this is too strong a term to describe how we might expect animals to behave.
Therefore it seems that the correct answer is ‘strange’.

Exercise 6: Benjamin

Read the passage and for each ofthe words or phrases below, tick the option (A, B, C or D) which
has the same meaning that the word has in the passage.

it was hardly surprising that Benjamin did so well in the examination, as he did four, and
, occasionally five, hours homework every night. He studied at weekends and was a delight to
his teachers because he never declined to take on extra homework tasks.

i Occasionally

A always 8 sometimes C slowly D especially
ii Declined
A stopped B stooped C refused D slowed
[2marks]

Exercise 7: Sophie

Read the passage and for each ofthe words or phrases below, tick the option (A, B, C or D) which
has the same meaning that the word or phrase has in the passage.

Sophie stood on the edge ofthe pavement waiting for the traffic lights to change, so that she
could cross the road. The city was teeming with people, some in cars, some, like her, on foot.

She had been apprehensive about coming to Chittagong, but, now that she was here, she found
it a thrilling place to live.

i Teeming with

A shortof B sharedwith C overrunby D fullof
ii Apprehensive
A appalled B afraid C amazed D attentive
iii Thrilling
A exciting B fulfilling C frightening D welcoming
[3marks]Exercise 8: World Food Shortage

Read the passage and for each of the words below, tick the option (A, B, C or D) which has the same
meaning that the word has in the passage.

The world’s population is increasing at an astonishing rate and in some countries there is a
shortage of food, although this is often caused by natural disasters rather than as a direct
consequence of the population explosion.

i Astonishing
A amazing B absolute C alarming D appalling
ii Shortage
A reduction 8 little C lack D decrease
iii Consequence
A link B reaction C connection D result
iv Explosion
A burst 8 increase C destruction D discovery
[4 marks]

 
 

28 Quotation questions and vocabulary uuestions

161