An argumentative writing task requires you to construct a logically—developed argument. it
is not necessary to attempt to give equal weight to opposing points of view, but what you
write should be clear and rational and supported by appropriate examples and references.
You should try to avoid becoming too emotional in your approach and/or filling your essay
with personal comments and anecdotes which detract from your main line ofargument.

Exercise 1

Here is an example of a piece of argumentative writing. Read it through carefully and list the
features that you think make it an effective piece ofargumentative writing. Do you think that
there are any features of it which reduce its effectiveness? Do not read the commentary which
follows until you have done this.

‘You Can’t Judge a Book by its Cover’
Do you agree with this statement?

l often hear people say things like, ‘Wow! Look at that girl! i love her dress,’ or, ‘Oooh, see
that boy? He’s got a great physiqueli’ When saying these things, do we ever stop to think that
we are only looking at the appearance of a person and not at their inner self and what they
possess inside them?

Nowadays, people seem to concentrate too much on what they look like and what others
think ofthem. it always seems to be about a person’s appearance and not about that
person’s actual personality. This is a mistaken attitude to have, as we fail to see what people
are really like and what they have inside them.

As humans, we tend to makeiudgements of people by looking only at their appearance. For
instance, people might say, ‘Look at the dress that girl is wearing! l’m sure she can’t come
from a very good family.’ in saying this, we have automaticallyjudged that girl only on the
grounds of what she looks like and the clothes she is wearing.

We have failed to see what lies inside her and what she is really like. We do this all the time,
often without realising that we are doing it. is that what we really want?

A number of people may argue that it is a good thing to dress up and look good, not only for
others but for ourselves as well. i definitely agree with this. However, it should not happen
to the extent that this becomes everything a person cares about. Think about it; if all we
cared about was what we looked like, nobody would see us for the people we really are, but
rather for what we look like on the outside. ifwe continue with this attitude then we may
well produce a future society which cares only about superficial appearance; is this what we
really want? 1 don’t think so. When watching television we automatically make comments
about how good—looking or not certain presenters are and quite often comment on what
they are wearing. in many cases, however, while we are doing this we fail to take any notice
ofwhat they are saying and the important messages they may be trying to communicate.
This is what having too much interest in appearance is doing to us. it makes us miss out on
some of the important things we should be paying attention to.

34People, often teenagers, say things such as, ‘Thereis no way l’d go out with that girl; she’s so
unattractiyel’ Such a comment shows that the person making it has been conditioned by the
attitudes ofthe society of which he is a part. His friends tend to spend their time commenting
on the appearance of people, and so he automaticallyjudges the girl only by what she looks
likemand the appreciation of beauty is a very subjective thing, anyway. l’m sure this is not the
attitude we would want our children to have. We must stop paying too much attention to the
physical appearance of people around us, and of ourselves.

Being too interested in appearance even leads to people being distracted from their studies.
l’m sure parents have heard their children say things like, ‘Mum, I can’t study right now. l have
to get ready and look good. i’m going out
tonight!’ This is exactly what happens
when people care too much about their
appearance. They usually tend to stop
doing work only because they care

so much about their appearance. it
becomes a pointless distraction.

We, as individuals in our society, must
make sure that we stop worrying too
much about our appearance as this

is what will lead to us becoming an
egotistic and ignorant generation.
Appearance is not everything.

 

Suppose this essay was written under time constraints and was appreciated I
by teachers. Here are some of the reasons that make it an effective piece of
argumentative writing.

The tone is confident, not overly formal and clearly conveys the attitude of the writer.
There is a focused and direct opening which immediately engages the reader.

The writer keeps the argument within the bounds of his/her own experience.

There is a clear focus on the topic.

The writer does not try to include more points than it is possible to handle within the
limited time available.

The essay is structured through logically connected paragraphs which help to further
the writer’s argument.

There is a confident control of sentence structures and types with short sentences being
used effectively to emphasise key points.

The writer skilfully blends direct statements with direct questions which engage the
reader and develop the argument.

The essay develops from particular comments to more generalised concerns which
widen the scope of the argument.

There is a strong conclusion which powerfully sums up and re—emphasises the writer’s
point ofview.5 II'QIIMEIIIEIIWB writing l

36

“R >
Planning points '

A good argumentative essay should be based on a well—controlled structure which leads the
reader clearly from a well~defined opening to a forceful conclusion. A good way to make a
plan forsuch an essay is by writing down the topics of each paragraph and then organising
them into their most effective order. Here is the paragraph plan forthe essay given earlier.

. Introduction: Do wejudge people only by their appearance? (Note that, for effect, the
writer has made this point the topic ofthe opening two paragraphs.)

- ltisafeature ofhuman nature to do so.

- However, many people consider it important to look good.

- At some time or otherwe all comment on the appearance of other people.

- Our opinions of people’s appearance are influenced by the views ofthose around us.
- But beauty isinthe eye ofthe beholder.

- Conclusion: Appearance is not everything and a society which thinks it is will not be a
pleasant one.

Exercise 2

Here is an example of a less successful attempt at writing an argumentative essay. This contains
many errors of expression. It contains a number of relevant points but the structure of the essay
and the linking between paragraphs have quite serious limitations. Read the essay carefully and
then (i) re-write it, correcting all the errors of expression that you can identify and (ii) write your
own response to the task, using the ideas contained in this essay, but re—organising and developing
them to produce a more focused piece of work.

‘Do you Consider Sport an Important part of Life?’

Sports means every physical and mental effort we make to use extra energy our body consume,
for example energies like fat, that most oi as consume regularly. Sport is the key to a healthier life.

Sport is an important part ofour lile. Through sport we can prevent us from getting diseases
like cholesterol, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes. Doing sports activities will help us from
getting these diseases. Nowday, campaigns are made by government to sensitise people about
diseases like cholesterol, diabetes as this level of people carring diabetes is rising everyday.

With sport, specially football helps us to develop strategies either in playing football or in other
part of our life, for example in making new business strategies, in business decision making.
And also sports helps us to face problems in life and become more responsible, patient and
face social matters more easily and become more dynamic.

Nowdays sport is not only becoming an activity better a job because many people are talent in

many sport fielo like iootbali, Athletics and many others, scientifically in is prove that when a
person is doing sport, his/her organs are more developed than those who are not doing.

By doing sport the life expectancy of our organs tend to have a longer life than other citizens.
Also with sport we help our body to reinforce our muscles so as to be able to do work which
needs efforts and in some ways helping others like encouraging friends or neighbours to do
sport, by showing them how to do sports.

By giving elders and youngsters the example that we must do sport to have a good health,
encourage future generations to base a good health by doing sports and naturally will sensitise
people not only to have a good health but also to a good health we need a good environment,
and also a good or clear place to do sports activities. By this it will carry down a reduction in
pollution, of course it won’t be an immediate change it will take years to come, but where there
is a will there is a way.5 Argumemative writing

 

 

Sports for me is not only important in some way or another it is vital. Because with sport we
can bring many changes in our life either Physical} Health, or Attitudes and behaviours, with
sport a person can be more discipline and responsible in life. Sports is the key to success.

Exercise 3: Structuring an Argument

Here is a collection ofjumbled topic sentences which, when reorganised, will provide the skeleton
for an argumentative essay on the subject, ‘Life is so easy for teenagers today; it was so much
harder when their parents were young.’

How far do you agree with this comment? Organise the sentences into what you consider to be the
most effective order and then write your essay based on this plan.

Advances in technology have made things a lot easier for teenagers nowadays.
When I compare my life with that of my parents, I notice that there are many differences.

Advances in the technology which is so readily available to nearly all teenagers, as well as
making things easier, also produce their own problems.

On the other hand, my friends and i face considerably more and different pressures.
Taking all these points into consideration, it is possible to come to the following conclusion.

Other changes in society have also meant that today’s teenagers have an easier time than our
parents did.

These were certainly issues which did not bother our parents as the causes of them did not
exist in their day.

375 Arnumentallve writing

   

* l
Emotive vocabulary

In Chapter 2, we looked at how carefully chosen vocabulary allows a writerto convey precise
shades of meaning. Having an awareness of the connotations associated with certain Words
and phrases and oftheir effect on a reader is particularly helpful when you are writing
argumentatively and trying to encourage a reader to agree with your point of view. Consider
these statements made by a politician:

‘We should consider the possibility of raising taxes; hOWever, our opponents in parliament will
not be in favourofthis.’

‘We should consider the possibility of raising taxes; however, our enemies in parliament will
not be in favour ofthis.’

‘Opponent’ is a neutral word; it simply refers to members of a different political party with
different principles. ‘Enemies’, however, is an emotionally—charged word and implies that the
people with different ideas (the same people who were described in the previous sentence
as ‘opponents’) have some malicious purpose and want to cause harm to the speaker and
his/her colleagues. The second sentence would be likely, therefore, to provoke an angrier
response from the speaker’s supporters.

Exercise 4: Emotive Language
identify and explain the effects ofthe emotively~charged language in the following paragraph.

Out in the vast and empty oceans, if we are lucky, we will be able to observe the whales—«the
noble, graceful and immensely powerful giants of the sea. They are peaceful creatures whose
self—contained, gentle lives do not interfere with our land~based existence. We become aware
ofthem when they burst awesomely from the depths, spouting water skywards as if in greeting
to those who are watching.

And yet, there are some people whose response to their nobility and innocentjoy of living is a
harsh and cruel one. To them, the whale is an object ofsport which they must hunt and destroy

in order to prove the pathetic superiority of their murderous technology. The factory ships are
a dark stain on the wide seas.Tools for argumentative: writing

When you are writing to express yourviews on a particulartopic, one of your main concerns is
to convince your readers of your point ofview and to persuade them to agree with you. There
are certain writing techniques that you can use which will help you to be successful in this
purpose. For example, with this type ofwriting, it is important that you adopt an appropriate
tone (you should aim to be persuasive but not aggressive); you should pay close attention to
the structure ofyour argument, particularly to introductory and concluding paragraphs and
to the devices you use to link paragraphs as a way offurthering your argument.

Remember to try to use actual examples and, if appropriate, facts and statistics to support
your arguments. You also need to think carefully about yourvocabulary, especially whether to
choose emotively—toned words.

Exercise 5

Here is an extract from an article entitled ‘Why Homework is a Bad Idea’ published in ‘Hub Pages’,
an on—line magazine site. It is a good example of how an argument is constructed and expressed in
such a way as to persuade the reader to share the writer’s point ofview.

Read the passage carefully. With a partner, make notes of the main points of the writer’s argument
and then identify and explain the key features ofthe writer’s expression, in particular commenting
on any use of emotively—toned language. Read the comments following the passage after you have
done this.

Depending upon the school in question, children can be subjected to homework as early as
kindergarten, and certainly this burden has been imposed on every child by the third grade.

At the elementary school level, especially, this is a bad idea because young children are
known for having a very short attention span. They have already been forced to sit still for
approximately 6 hours at school, with usually only 2 short recess breaks and lunch.

Any teacher can vouch for the restlessness that occurs by the end ofthe day. By the time
school is out, the kidsiust want to go home, relax, and be a kids It is the rare child who enjoys
homework, and whose parents do not wage battles of one degree or another over the subject.

Typically, the child will arrive home, have a snack, possibly a short play break, and then he sat
down to do their homework. i doubt there are many parents who will not agree that this can be
a traumatic time. The child has already been exercising his or her brain all day at school. They
need time to digest the material, not do busy work at home.

Busy work, you say? Yes, that is exactly what homework is. Especially the sort of homework
that involves copying out questions already printed in the textbook, This is a waste oftime,
paper, and face it, a cause of frustration, extra tiredness and sloppy penmanship. Little hands
tire and cramp up easily.

lfyou look at school as a child’s ‘job’ and compare otherjobs held by adults, you will soon
realize that there are not very manyjobs that require the employees to take work home and
continue to work on their own time. The teaching profession is one of the exceptions, but they
can reduce their own ‘homework’ load by not assigning homework to theirstuo’ents! Look at all
the extra paperwork and ‘correcting’ that would eliminatei

There is another even more practical reason for eliminating homework. The common argument
in favor is that'the homework is intended to reinforce the day’s lessons.

That’s a nice theory, but it is something of a straw man defense. lithe lesson was presented
well, and the student understood it, they will remember it.

lfthe lesson was not understood, then what happens at homework time? The student is lost,
has no idea of the concept, and will practice and reinforce errors instead. Now, extra time

and work must be done to reverse this problem, the student will have suffered wasted time,
somedegree of mental trauma in having his/her work red—penciled, and depending upon thier
personality, a possible blow to their self—esteem.5 Argumentatiue Wl'itillﬂ l

This is a good example of a piece of effective argumentative writing. The writer adopts a
deliberately controversial stance; the tone of voice, however, is initially calm and reasoned,
at times almost colloquial in its vocabulary (‘be a kid’) and use of personal pronouns (‘you’)
both ofwhich devices help to directly involve the reader.

)

As well as this, however, the writer cleverly uses more generalised statements such as ‘I
doubt there are many parents who will not agree  and ‘there are not manyjobs that
require employees to take work home  which give the argument a sense of authority. The
overall balanced tone ofthe writing also serves to give greater force to the emotively—toned
vocabulary (‘they have already been forced to sit still  ‘some degree of mental trauma ...’)
which occurs effectively throughout the piece.

The writer also skilfully controls hersentence structures using a mixture of complex and
shorter sentences to great effect; this technique is used most effectively in the sentence which
concludes the fifth paragraph and which emphatically sums up a key point in the argument.

Exercise 6

Now, using your summary ofthe main points made by the writer in ‘Why Homework is a Bad ldea’,
write your own essay on the topic in which you present an opposing argument.

Exercise 7

Write an argumentative essay on the topic: ‘Money Can’t Buy Happiness’. How far do you agree
with this statement?

Given below, in no particular order, are some comments which you may want to use as points in
your argument.

Record amounts are being paid out by parents on birthday parties and celebrations to ensure that
their child’s big day is one to remember.

Ian Wright, one time professional footballer and now a TV presenter, spent three days in the
wilderness with Kalahari Bushmen. ‘I feel very humbled by the Bushmen,’ he said. ‘They don’t
know anything other than their life and they seem pretty happy.’

‘Have you ever added up the cost of bringing up a child? Parents in the UK may spend up to £10,000
a year in bringing up their children.’

City traders can earn millions but their average retirement age has fallen to below 40; stress and
sickness are the causes.

More and more people are finding that giving to those in need is more satisfying than buying
luxuries for themselves.

Finally, here is a selection of argumentative essay titles similar to those that you
might be given in an examination. Choose one and write between 350 and 500 words.

1 ‘The challenges of life bring out the best in young people.’ What are yourviews?

2 ‘People are much too interested in their appearance nowadays.’ Do you agree?

3 What aspects ofyour education do you think will be most useful to you in adult life?
4 ‘Animals and birds should never be kept in cages.’ What is your opinion?

5 ‘Children do not spend enough time with their parents nowadays.’ What is your opinion?