Narrative Wl‘ilillg

 

Some essay topics require you to write a short story. Choosing one ofthese topics allows you
to use your imagination and show how creative you can be. However, a narrative essay is not
an easy option to do well. Before starting on it, you need to bearthe following in mind.

Do not make the story too complicated; you have only a limited period of time and
it is important that you plan your answer carefully to keep it tightly focused.

- Keep closely to the given title or topic; many short stories written under time
constraints fail to make a good impression because they wander away from the
topic and lose credibility.

- Try to write a story which contains events which could be within your own
experience; teachers do not find unsophisticated secret agent stories particularly
enjoyable orconvincing.

- Try to break up long sections of narrative with passages of direct speech.
Remember. however, that making direct speech sound authentic and punctuating it
correctly are difficult skills. lfyou don’t get it right, your story will not be successful.

- Do not repeat a story you have read or written elsewhere; memorised stories
seldom fit the given topic and teachers will always spot thejoins.

Exercise 1

Here are two examples of narrative writing. The topic is to continue the story using the following
opening sentences: Having reluctantly agreed to meet them at 11 pm precisely in this deserted
part oftown, / anxiously scanned every moving shadow. [was afraid! would miss them, afraid also
that they would not turn up.

Both the examples deal with the same topic. Read through the two stories carefully and make
notes of the good and less good qualities contained in each one. Discuss with a partner how
they could be improved and which one you think is better and why.Copying out and using the following grid will help you in making this comparison.

(The features listed in the grid should also provide a good checklist of points to cover when you are
writing your own essays of all types.)

Essay 1 T Essay 2

Treatment of task

 

 

Presentation of situation
Narrative standpoint
Tone/register
Vocabulary/expression

Structure
Development of ideas

 

Conclusion
Structure of paragraphs
Paragraph linking

Technical accuracy

Sentence stru ctu res: range/variety
Punctuation

Grammatical accuracy

Use of idiom

Spelling

 

 

 

 

 

Essay 1

Having reluctantly agreed to meet them at 11 pm precisely in this deserted part of town,l
anxiously scanned every moving shadow. l was afraid i would miss them, afraid also that they
would not turn up.

lhadn’t spent this much time alone in so long, it felt wrong. it felt like somehow i wasn’t meant
to be here. ‘Shut up!’ i said to myself. ‘Don’t be stupid.’

As my eyes eventually adjusted to the darkness, objects around me became clearer, much
easier to distinguish. l was standing under a huge oak tree, where we had agreed to meeti
knew this must be the right one: there wasn’t another tree for miles.

Eventually after what seemed like an age, 1 heard voices and they seemed to be getting closer,
Not yet being able to make out what the voices belonged to, l strained my ears to hear what
they were saying.

‘No, l’ll grab him and you can knock him out.’A cold fear rushed through my veins, i knew for
sure that voice belonged to Rajeev.

lfeitsick to my stomach when i realised that this had all been a plan, Rajeey had it in for men
big time.

l knew in that moment that i had to get away. i had to run. 1 ran until my heart was pounding my
ears and my breath ached in my chest. i ran through fields, over fences and stone walls. i ran
through gardens and dark alleyways. i ran along roads and streets that i had never seen before.

When i finally came to a stop, my legs didn’t feel like they belonged to me anymore. i looked
around and then it hit me. i didn’t have a clue where l was. All i had thought about was running
and getting as tar away from Rajeev as was possible.

i tried to think back to when i was running. i could remember running but my surroundings
were hazy. i wasn’t even sure iii was in the same town anymore. i sat down on the cold, muddy
floor, rested my back against a low wall and closed my eyes.

N»8 Narrative Wl'ilillﬂ

 

   
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
    
 
  
    
  
    

And then I felt it, a strangled sob, fighting to escape from the pit of my stomach. i had to midi

in, i couldn’t cry now. What iisomeone walks past? I reopened my eyes and blinked to sett
tears. i knew that i wasn’t upset about being lost. Well

Rajeev that bothered me. Now that he had his own littl
it wasn’tjust name calling and joking anymore.

Tomorrow was Monday; there was no way i could go back to school. I had to stay away for as
long as possible. Wait for things to calm down a bit. l couldn’t go back home, id be made to go
to school. l could sleep here. it was cold and it was muddy but if it meant that i didn’t have to
to school tomorrow l was willing to. l curled up in a ball, pulling my knees up to my Chest and

closed my eyes. i promised myselfthat by the end of tomorrow i would have everything sorted
out. There wasjust one question leis—How?

t

le the
not upset enough to cry anyway. it was

e gang, he had become worse than ever,

go‘

Essay 2

Having reluctantly agreed to meet them at 11 pm precisely in this deserted part of town, i

anxiously scanned every moving shadow. i was afraid i would miss them, afraid also that they
would not turn up,

i then hear a crowd of voices, l look around but see nothing, the suspence is killing me.

niterS months oi being bullied, threatened, intimidated, it all comes down to today, this is my

chance to show them that they can’t do this to me anymore, We had enough.

i then hear my name being called. ‘Where are you?’ They shouted.

Next thing there i am standing on my own, with a crowd of? boys walking towards me.

i told him to come on his own, but he was obviously too much of a coward, he had to bring
his friends.

As they walk towards me; i hear loud footsteps, my heart begins to beat faster and faster.

lhave to stay cool and calm. l’m not going to continue to be picked on all the time, i have to
be strong.

As the boys are getting closer and closer to me, l’rn very scared but I’m not going to show it,
otherwise he’ll see, and think his won and he can carry on bullying me, and other people, well,

he cant, not anymore. it was 11:15 pm, pitch black, with only the streetlights on, i can honestly
say this is the scaryist time in my lite

i then feel a hand over my mouth, then tape goes over it and a bag is placed over my head

You will almost certainly have come to the conclusion that Essay 1 is the better oithe two and

your notes in the grid should provide a clear indication as to wh

y. However, both essays share
some positive qual

ities. Both deal with events which are convincingly within the experience
of the narrator; neither Ofthem is over—ambitious as each concentrates on one particular
episode and develops it effectively without introducing too many complicated twists and

turns. Also, each oithe two writers appears to have planned for the essay to conclude at a
particular point in orderto leave the reader in some suspense.

Now we will look at the points in the grid in more detail to see h

ow they can be used to help
you in planningyour own narrative writing.8 Narrative writing

R
Treatment of task

Presentation of situation and setting

The essential point about producing an effective short narrative is to be economical in the
telling ofthe story. Lengthy scene—setting and description is better suited to a long novel.
Your concern is to engage your reader as quickly as you can but also to ensure that the
situation you are presenting can be understood straightaway Before starting to write your
story, you should try to put yourself in the position ofyour readers. Ask yourself a couple of
straightforward questions such as, “What do my readers need to know?” “What important
details about the setting ofthe story do i need to give them so that they can quickly
understand the background ofwhere the events happen?”

Remember, you may have a clear idea ofthe scene in your mind, but a readerwill not have it
unless you give a clear, but not over—detailed, description of it.

Narrative standpoint

The first decision you have to make is whetheryou intend to present your story through a first
or third person narrative. A first person narrative is possibly more effective in allowing a reader
to identify with the narrator (which is particularly important for a short narrative) and it also
means that the events described can only be those within the narrator’s experience ~ again,
an effective way to limit the focus and range ofyour narrative.

On the other hand, using a third person narrative allows for a more omniscient approach. if
you intend your story to conclude with, for example, the death ofthe central character, then a
first person narrative standpoint may present problemsl

Characters

When you are writing a short story (especially under time constraints), you should try to be
as economical as you can in yourdescription ofcharacters and not to include too many of
them in yourstory. it is important thatyou give some brief and pertinent details aboutyour
characters so that your readers can form an idea ofthem in their minds and can, therefore,
build up an understanding of how those characters are likely to act and behave in the course
ofthe story.

However, these introductory details need be little more than one sentence character
summaries such as, “Rita, who was always on time for everything and never looked untidy or
tired” or “David was the sort of person who never panicked and was always a reliable friend.”
Once you have established your characters, it is important that they then behave consistently
with the characteryou have created for them. (The extract from My Family and OtherAn/mq/s
in the chapter on Personal Writing and the short story ‘Coconuts’ which concludes this
chapter are both very good examples of economical presentation of characters and setting.)Tone/ register

The tone and registeryou use will, to some extent, depend upon the narrative standpoint you
have chosen. A first person narrative allows for a more informal, colloquial approach which is
suited particularly to the type of story told in the two examples above.

The narrator’s tone ofvoice is an effective way of communicating his or her personality and
character.

A short narrative can be made much more effective if a person’s character is communicated
through their language register rather than by a lengthy description of that character.

Vocabulary/ expression

The vocabulary used by the narrator ofthe story and his or her sentence patterns are also an
effective way of establishing character. An awareness ofthe associations and connotations
of the vocabulary you use will also help to establish a suitable atmosphere forthe story you
are telling.

\
Structure

Development of ideas

Your narrative should quickly establish the direction it is going to take and the sequence of
events should be planned to develop coherently. Keep your readers in mind at all times; if
they find it difficult to follow what is happening, they will quickly lose interest. Remember

. that you have only limited time in which to write, so try not to produce too complicated a

narrative. When making your plan, make sure that you decide on how to finish your story and
keep the end point clearly in mind as you are writing.

Conclusion

When you plan your narrative be sure that you have a clear understanding of how it is going
to conclude. You may decide that yourfinal paragraph will wrap up all the loose ends ofyour
story oryou may want to leave your readers in mid»air.

What is important, however, is that, whichever the ending you choose, it should be the one
you have planned for. The best narratives arrive at a logical conclusion, ratherthan just

stopping because the author can think of no more to write. (The logically planned conclusion
can, of course, be unexpected by the reader.)

Wyaﬁmmwmﬁww, z   ..Structure of paragraphs

You should use paragraphs to structure your story and their topic sentences are likely to
provide the key stages of your narrative. Remember, each paragraph should be a unity within
itself, but should also contribute to the overall unity of the story you are writing.

Although short, one or two—sentence paragraphs can be very effective for emphasising details,
they should be used sparingly; too many short paragraphs result in a fragmented narrative.

Paragraph linking

Although it is important to link your paragraphs to form a coherent narrative it is equally
important that you vary the ways in which you link them to ensure that you retain the
interest of your readers. Try to vary the position of the topic sentences as well, to add variety
to your style.

“a
Technical accuracy

Sentence structures: range/variety

Just as you are concerned about varying your paragraph links and lengths, so you should also
think aboutvaryingthe length and structure ofthe sentences in your narrative. Repetitive
sentence types (for example, having all sentences follow the same subject—verb opening
pattern: ‘it was. .  ‘He did. .  ‘She said. . .’) very soon become monotonous.

 

Think about varying the word order and mixing simple and complex sentences and use
each type as appropriate. For example, simple sentences can effectively create pace in your
narrative while complex sentences are more suitable for reflective or descriptive sections.

Use of idiom

In an examination, you should be able to write accurately using Standard English. Although
narrative writing sometimes requires a less formal tone than some other types of essay, it is
important that you still use Standard English ~ although, if some of the characters in your
story speak using a local dialect, it is perfectly acceptable to reproduce that at times to add
authenticity to your narrative as long as this is not overdone.

However, if you are writing in an informal register, inappropriate or outdated colloquialisms
will not convince your readers of the credibility of the character using them.

Punctuation, grammatical accuracy, spelling

As in all examination essays, it is important that you observe the conventions ofcorrect
spelling, grammar and punctuation. You may, of course, make one ofthe characters in
your story speak ungrammatically for effect. But it is important to show that you can write
accurately in the rest of the narrative so that the reader is aware ofyour including the
ungrammatical sections deliberately to create an intended effect.i V

I 8 Narrative writing 1

Exercise 2

Choose three of the following topics. (a) Produce a skeleton plan (using paragraph topic sentenceS)
for each ofthem. (b) Write opening and concluding paragraphs for each one you have Chosen using
a first person narrator. (c) Write opening and concluding paragraphs for each one you have chosen
using a third person narrator.

l The Closed Door

2 Write a story beginning: ‘It wasjust an ordinary weekday morning
3 Breaking the Rules

4 The Woman with the Bicycle

5

Write a story containing the words, ‘I knew that it would never work.’

Exercise 3: Coconuts

Here is a short story by the writer, David lglehart. Read it for pleasure in your groups. But while
doing so, discuss with each other and make notes about how the author has presented his
characters and their surroundings and circumstances, and how he has structured the story to
develop to its conclusion. You should also consider the tone of the narrator and what message the
story contains, ifany.

When you have collated your comments, independently write your own analysis ofthe story,
explaining what makes this an effective short story.

Coconuts

in the suburb ofAdyar,}ust west of Chennai, a religious society dedicated to brotherhood,

the study of comparative religion, and the unexplained laws of nature and man has built

its international headquarters. With its large foilowing and financial resources, it has filied

its park~iike estate, bordered by the blue Bay of Bengal and the ornate palace ofa former
maharaja, with churches and temples from every major creed in history. The temple is weil
attended by worshippers from the surrounding area. Germans, Lithuanians, and Argentineans
in ochre robes medétate at gracefui Buddhist stupas or wander contemplativeiy among theﬂowering plants and trees brought in by members from around the world, and Hindu pilgrims
by the thousands come to see an enormous banyan. With religious attractions like these, not to
mention its famous library of rare books and ancient palm—leaf manuscripts, the society has a
constant stream of visitors. And for years all ofthern had to pass before one small mystery that
hardly anyone noticed ~ the life—and—death struggle between two women who sold coconuts,
just outside the iron front gate.

To say that Chennai is hot is a ridiculous understatement. Anyone who walks outside in the
fiery depth of summer and wants to stay sane, not to mention survive, has to have something
to drink. Those visitors to the society who had the money and didn’t mind walking several
blocks out of their way could buy an iced, sugared milk at the stand ofthe Tamil Nadu Milk
Cooperative. Those who had smaller budgets and had walked too much already, could buy an
inexpensive coconut right at the gate and drink the milk. Business was steady, if not lucrative,
and, miraculously, ninety~five percent of it always went to the woman who stood on the left of
the gate. Naturally this drove the other woman crazy.

it takes a certain amount of capital to go into the coconut business, enough to buy a hefty knife
to slice off the tops, a box of straws, and a pile of coconuts, not the small black kind found in
American supermarkets but the big, oblong green ones full ofclear, tangy milk. That may not
sound like a lot of money, but for someone who lives on a couple of hundred rupees a month

in a thatched hut that gets flooded out twice a year by the monsoon rains it’s hard to save up.
Otherwise ten or twenty women might have been selling by the gate. Still, the two women were
equally well equipped.

Vijaya, on the left, was rounded, in her early sixties, and had long gray hair. She wore a
threadbare sari but looked healthier and more prosperous than, say, the gangly bicycle
repairman who had to live and work among the branches ofthe small banyan across from the
milk stand or the wizened old bullock shoe—er who waited motionless by the main road with his
tiny hammer, tiny anvil, strip of rope, and handful oftiny nails.

Sharada was also in her sixties, but she was thin and in bad tone and wore her hair short. Her
sari was torn in many places, and she was obviously not doing well. Most of the day she stood
alone, glowering before her unsold pile of coconuts.

When a festive crowd of pilgrims got offthe city bus in front of the society, those who wanted
coconuts were drawn magnetically to Vijaya. Only when Vijaya’s line was long enough to make
them completely impatient would one or two pilgrims drift over to Sharada,just enough to
keep her hanging on, perpetually mystified.

A greywhaired man from the neighbourhood might walk up on his way to a lecture on devotion
to Krishna, slender and dignified in his white shirt and linen dhoti. A beautiful young woman in
a lavender and gold silk sari, with jasmine flowers in her thigh—length black hair, might arrive
with her small children to see the holy sites. And although both women at the towering gate
would hold up identical coconuts and quote identical prices, although Sharada even called out
louder, each customer would go to Vijaya, leaving Sharada sputtering in reiection.

To Sharada, this was a terrible injustice, Years before, she had been the first of them to setup
business there A widow with grown children and a living to earn, she had searched through
the area for a suitable spot for months, selling one coconut here, another there, wherever she
wasn’t driven away by other vendors. One day she passed before the society and noticed with
surprise that the former coconut seller was gone. When she asked around and learned that the
other woman had died, she seized the place as her own at once, intuitively selecting the more
auspicious corner on the right, And at first she made decent money there for hertrade, and
thanked the gods for the good fortune that had come her way. Finally she had the chance to get
out of the financial difficulties that had plagued her all her life and the near destitution she had
been thrust into after her husband’s death.

But after only a few months of success, she arrived one morning to find Vijaya setting up her
own pile of coconuts on the left of the gate, which meant she’d been observing Sharada and
should have known better, The perpetually bored, khaki-clad guard at the gate smiled at
the implications, but Sharada was greatly offended. The previous seller had always worked
alone, and there really wasn’t enough business to be shared. Sharada glared at Vijaya and
told her in loud, abusive terms that she’d better go away, But Vijaya merely nodded with aV

B Narrative Wl'ilillﬂ l

reserved politeness, pointed out that there was plenty of room, and then ignored Sharada and
went about her work. After that, the two competitors didn’t speak for more than a year. Their
competition, however, began in earnest.

Sharada knew her business was bound to decline, but she believed she could hold on to most
of it. For some weeks she watched with satisfaction as Vijaya hardly made a sale. She hoped
the woman would admit defeat quickly and find some other place, but day after day Vijaya
stood patiently and very still before her pile, holding up a green coconut for all to see, like a
living effigy. And when someone finally bought one, her face would light up momentarily and
she would hand over the coconut graciously, as if it were a blessing. Gradually more and more
passers'by began to buy from her, especially repeat customers, and Sharada counted up a
smaller profit each evening.

Appalled, Sharada did everything she could to stem her losses. She made it a point to arrive
there first every morning. She arranged to have a larger pile of coconuts than Vijaya’s, and even
wiped them all down with a rag so that they looked clean and fresh. The straws in her box Were
pristine. She sharpened and re~sharpened her knife, and wielded it with a flourish when she
sliced off the tops. But over the period of a year her sales plummeted for reasons she simply
couldn’t comprehend, while Vijaya’s rose.

it would have been better for her to pick up her coconuts right then and move somewhere
else, where her prospects might have improved. But the society had been the best location
she’d ever found, and ifshe left she would not only face the search for a new one, but more
quarrels with still more vendors, who covered literally every corner in the city. On top of that,
itjust didn’t make sense to her that she couldn’t compete. She had been there first! She had
established customersl And she not only had the very same supplies, but more oftheml Why
should she be the one who was dislodged?

She began to observe Vijaya carefully to learn her secrets. Because Vijaya stood still with a
raised coconut like a goddess, she did too. She also tried to imitate Vijaya’s gratitude and
graceful gestures, all to no effect. Besides, they made her feel self-conscious and ridiculous.
What was it then, Vijaya’s weight? Sharada ate rice ravenously for a while, but no matter how
hard she tried she couldn’t take on Vijaya’s rounded shape. it was too expensive to eat like
that anyway.

Then she tried a bold stroke. Early one morning she occupied Vijaya’s corner. it wasjust
possible that lndian pedestrians, who usually keep to the left, the way drivers there stay on

the left side of the street, would also buy coconuts on the left, although everyone knew that
everything on the right was always more auspicious. And her coup had immediate effects.
When Vijaya arrived that day, she was plainly taken aback. Sharada watched with unconcealed
amusement while the poor woman hesitated a good five minutes, but then Vijaya simply set up
shop on the right.

For a few days Sharada’s income increased, but then the balance of sales began to tip in Vijaya’s
favor again, as ifon the great scale of life she had the heavier coconut. Sharada was incensed!

it was like a slap in her poor face, when she had suffered so much already. Shortly afterwards
she began to doubt herself, and she went that night to a temple of Lakshmi, goddess of good

fortune, and prayed long and hard.

The following morning, filled with a new determination, she moved back to her old spot on the
right. Vijaya let her. This time the relocation had no noticeable effect, and Sharada’s downward
spiral resumed as if her most earnest prayers had been ignored or rejected.

A note of hopelessness crept into Sharada’s voice as she tried to hawk her wares, and she
fumed and sulked bitterly when she failed, which did her business still more harm. it simply
made no sense to her to lower her prices, since they were standard for the market and set at
a pathetic minimum anyway. instead, she began insulting Vijaya when no one else was there,
to the guard’s vast amusement. And in moments of frustration, watching her rival tuck away
rupee notes in the folds of her sari, she began to mutter to herself venomously and swing her
knife around, which scared many customers half out of their wits.8 Narrative writing

Finally the cauldron of hot emotions within her boiled over. One day when twenty pilgrims
clustered about Vijaya for her sacred coconuts made of gold, while none at all went to Sharada,
she dropped her coconut to the ground with an ominous thud. Shouting incoherently, she
rushed at Vijaya with her knife still in her hand. The crowd around Vijaya parted. The khaki—clad
guard at the society’s gate shouted something and ran out. A tall man in the crowd grabbed

at her, but she darted to the side and he missed. When she was in range, she insulted Vijaya
brutally and raised her knife. Vijaya turned toward her with her damned coconut and her own
knife, unraised, and looked at Sharada wide eyed but hardly moving, and took a deep breath.
A sad sympathy filled her eyes, as ifshe understood Sharada’s plight only too well. Sharada
hadn’t expected this. Dismayed, she felt frail and weak before her. In her confused state, she
remembered the graceful image of Lakshmi from the temple the night before, which in its
splendor seemed to merge somehow with Vijayals rags. Trembling with a Hindu dread of what
would happen to her if she went on, through the laws of karma in this life or the next, stronger
by farthan herfear of prison, Sharada lowered her knife.

 

The tall man grabbed her, and then the guard did too. But by then her fire had gone out. She
realised she was muttering something even she couldn’t understand. The two men sat her
down by the gate, and the guard wet his handkerchief with cool water and washed her face
with obvious annoyance and distaste. No one called the police because no crime had really
taken place, just a moment ofanger. Eventually Sharada wandered home without her pile of
coconuts, went to bed without eating, and fell into an exhausted sleep. When she returned the
next morning, dreading her losses because her coconuts sure to have been stolen, she found
them all still there. Actually, they were back again, because Vijaya had paid a boy two of her
own coconuts to take Sharada’s home the night before and then return them to their place. it
was an act of kindness for which Sharada never forgave her. Grimly Sharada took up her old
position on the right, and her life resumed its apparently natural, downward course.

For her part Vijaya stood calmly on the left, doing a good trade, barely making money because
that was the nature ofthe business, but surviving, even saving a little. A sweet- natured woman
who was also widow and lived on the verge ofdestitution, she kept close watch of Sharada
through the corner of her eye. But though she felt a sense of accomplishment and triumph
that sometimes made her smile and glow when the customers crowded around her, she bore
Sharada no ill will. By and large she ignored her. Instead, day in and day out for more than
twenty years, she stood with perfect confidence at her post before the religious society and
focused on her way in life, which was to provide refreshing coconuts as pleasantly as possible
to whatever thirsty travelers might come to her, to pilgrims on their way to a ban‘yan tree

and holy places, until she came to seem serene and selfless and pilgrims were drawn to her
naturally, as if she were herself a holy shrine.

Source: ‘Cororwts by Davrd lglehart iwwweastofthewebcorni

Finally, here is a selection of narrative essay titles similar to what you might come
across in an examination. Choose one and write between 350 and 500 words.

Write a story based on one of the following.

1 A person who was injured but kept it a secret and caused herfriends great trouble.
2 The new bus driver.

3 Write a story with the title: An Unexpected Visitor.

4 Write a story beginning: ‘l could tell by his face that he was angry’.

5 Write a story about the rivalry between two elderly people.