22 Selecting and retrieving
information Ill! lining

  

Now we will look at some ofthe other questions asked at the start of Chapter 20.

- Do i need to use my own words?

- Am i allowed to use words ofthe original text?

The answerto these questions is that you may use the words of the original text unless
you are told otherwise. In questions where you are required to use your own words, the
wording ofthe question will make that clear. You will look at such questions later. Right
now you will deal only with questions where you are allowed to use the words of the text.
This is called lifting from the text.

Remember

Unless the question specifies use ofown words, it is acceptable to lift from the text.

 

However, when you lift from the text to answer a question, you must make sure that you do

not include material from the text which is not necessary in your answer.

lfyou do include extra, unnecessary information, your answer might not be considered
acceptable by teachers. Look at the short passage below.

The appearance of land at the end of a lang sea voyage must be a welcome sight for any
ship’s captain. Yet he has to be particularly alert at this stage of the voyage, for in many
parts ofthe world there are often rocky islands clase to the shore he is approaching.

9r N“ from 3

Question:
Answer 1:
Answer2:
Answer 3:

Answer 4:

 

 

in bi, Donald M. fraser

    

willy? tilllx’il/Uljc‘ .l M? Pom/'2 Ole, Ji.'l.v:.1i‘{/’»

At what stage of a sea journey must a captain be ‘particularly alert’?
He must be alert at the end ofthe voyage.

He must be alert when land appears.

The appearance of land at the end ofa long sea voyage.

The appearance of land at the end of a long sea voyage must be a welcome
sight for any ship’s captain.

Answers 1 and 2 are correct. Each of them has selected and retrieved key words from the
passage which answerthe question and recast them in a sentence.134

 

Answer3 is also correct. It is a direct lift from the passage but this is acceptable because,
unless otherwise stated, this is not an own words question. This is a literal comprehension
question and the answer lies on the surface ofthe text.

 

Exercise 1: Coral Reefs

From the passage which follows answer the questions by lifting.

A thriving coral reef is one ofthe most glorious sights on our planet. Anyone swimming
underwater near a coral reef for the first time is likely to find it a beautiful place teeming with
life of every description set among a rich and random pattern of colours.

Coral reefs are second oniy to rain forests in the huge number of plants and animals they
support. Just as forest plants have been used for hundreds of years for medicinal purposes by
people living in the rain forests, so some reefplants and animals have been used by people in
coastal communities to help cure diseases like malaria.

Source: Adapted from The Greenpcoce Book orCordl Reefs

2 in what ways are coral reefs almost as important as rain forests7 ll]
3 What common benefit do people livmg in rain forests and people lIvrng near coral reefs

get from local plants? [1]

[3 marks]

'lext ada ited from Cantor/cine O Leveit’nn/ish loom/o e i 120 Paine/“2 71 c7 x b, “3 a, ivoveml'JerQOM
., a J _ ,

Exercise 2: Grandfather
From the passage which follows answer the questions by lifting.

She loved to sit on her grandfather’s knee while he read her stories for what seemed like hours.
He never tired of reading to her and it would never have occurred to her that he would refuse to
do so. His voice was gruff but comforting; it was his reading voicejust for her.

Sometimes she took a peek at his face; his skin was wrinkly and she liked to trace with her eye
particular lines as they meandered from one side of his face to the other. He had a white, bushy
moustache which curled up at the edges and twitched as his lips moved over the mysterious

symbols on the page which she did not understand but loved to listen to. She had to sit very

still as his clothes were scratchy and made her legs red if she moved too much.
1 Why did the little girl like to sit on her grandfather’s knee? [1]

the little girl? [1]
4 Why did the little girl have to sit very still on her grandfather’s knee? [1]
[4 marks]Exercise 3: Friendship with Jennifer

From the passage which follows answer the questions by lifting.

AWNi—t

She spent a day with an old friend and felt reaily refreshed. She and Jennifer as a team had a
long history. They made their shy introductions on their first day at primary school and since
then have shared many high w and low —— points in their respective lives. Theyjoined the local
youth club together, and walked and talked and went shopping together. They discussed each
other’s boyfriends.

in a nutshell they grew up together. Her day with Jennifer restored her well-being, her
happiness, her sanity. But more than that, it made her reflect on the nature of real friendship
~having someone value you for what you are.

What had made the woman feel ‘really refreshed’? [1]
When did the woman and her friend meet each other for the first time? [1]
Give an example of one activity that the two friends did together. [1]
What was the main advantage gained by the woman from her day spent with her old friend? [1]

[4 marks]

Exercise 4: The London Marathon

From the passage which follows answer the questions by lifting.

Chrisis best friend had told him he was mad even to consider running the London marathon,
and, as his friend was a doctor, Chris took his comment seriously. However, for months he was
out running on the pavements around his home trying to forget that his build was neither slim
nor athletic. Not for him the lure of fame or fortune; he had committed himself to raise money
for charity. More than twenty six miles ~— he told himself not to think about it as he sweated
on the treadmili in his local gym. He tried, unsuccessfully, to think of it as fun, but that was
stretching his imagination too far. But when it was over Chris did feeljust that little superior —
and he had had a great tour of London!

Why did Chris take his friend’s comments seriously? [1]
What two reasons does the writer give to suggest that Chris was not suited to running a
marathon? [1]
Why was Chris determined to run the marathon? [1]
in what two ways did Chris train forthe marathon? ' [2]
Apart from making Chris feel superior, what was the other advantage to him of running
the marathon? [l]
[6 marks]

Remember

Although all ofthese questions can be answered by lifting, they could be answered

in otherways. But the important point here is that, although some questions can be
answered by lifting, you must not copy over sections of the text which do not in fact
answer the questions. In such cases, the excess in your answer makes it unacceptable.
It tends to be easier, literal comprehension questions which can be answered by lifting.

Remember
When you answer a question by lifting, make sure that you do not stray into areas ofthe
text that are irrelevant to the correct answer.

 

135

22 Solarium; and rotrlovlnu Information Ilii Ilnlnu fl