15 Writing summaries which
are relevant and coherent

Once you have made your list of content points, either in note form orsentences, (and we
have discussed in Chapter 12 what is meant by ‘notes’ in this context) you will be asked to
write these notes into a summary which is relevant and coherent formal continuous prose.

\

Relevance

Using material which is relevant means using only information which answers the question
and avoiding:

- material which merely repeats a previously made point
- material which gives particular information merely illustrating a previously made point

- material which is a topic sentence, or introduction, to the subject being discussed or
described.

 

For example
Look at the following passage, already used to find content points, to answerthe
question: Why do tourists visit Sr/Lanko?

 

Sri Lanka, which means ‘Beautiful Lanka’, is a favourite place fortourists. They enjoy

its wonderful climate, its all-yeariound heat, especially those from colder, Western
countries, They are drawn to the beauty ofthe island—~the coastal regions and the
mountainous areas~and it is hardly surprising that millions of visitors arrive each year

to enjoy the delights ofthis country, Tourist hotels are of a high standard, which is yet
another attraction. They are well designed and modern, with facilities appreciated by their
residents. The capital, Colombo, ensures an abundance ofstores and boutiques to suit
every taste and wallet, whether in the latest fashions, more traditional clothing, jewellery,
perfumes  the list is endless Everyone can afford to shop in Colombo; there are many low
budget shops and hawker stalls, as well as the glittering, glamorous stores; Tourists enjoy
walking through neighbourhoods where Ceylonese food is on sale in a variety of welcoming
restaurants, and where the very best and tastiest of food is sure to be served15 Wl‘ilill! summaries which are I'BIEWIIII aml BOIIBI‘GIII l

100

- ’Sri lanka is a favourite place for tourists” is a topic sentence, i.e. it sets the scene by
introducing the context for the question asked.

- ‘which means ‘Beautiful Lanka” is a detail which illustrates the topic sentence

- ‘the coastal regions and the mountainous areas’ illustrates or gives extra information about
the beauty ofthe island

- ‘it is hardlysurprising’ is an opinion, and not a detail, which supports why people go to visit
Sri Lanka

- ‘which isyet another attraction’ underpins the content points, but need not be repeated in
your answer

- ‘whether in the latest fashions, more traditional clothing, jewellery, perfumes’ elaborates on
why stores and boutiques suit every taste and wallet.

Exercise 1

Re—read the passages ‘School Uniform’ and ‘Cycle Rickshaws in Dhaka’ from Chapter 13 and answer
the question that follows.

School Uniform

Many schools insist that the students wear school uniform. Probably the most popular type

of school uniform is a shirt for both girls and boys, with black trousers and black skirt for

male and female students respectively. A tie might also be worn. The heads of schools tend to
favour the wearing of uniform for their students because it encourages a sense of belonging

to the same group, like being in one big family. Furthermore, school uniform puts an end to
any possibility of some students being seen to be better offthan others, if rich kids have more
money to spend on designer clothes which are popular with the younger generation, the poorer
kids know nothing about it. All students look the same, both rich and poor, and so school
uniform is a great leveller of social groups. Children can concentrate on their studies without
‘vvorrying whether or not they’re dressed in the latest fashions. Fashion items can be kept in
better condition because they are not being worn out in the rough and tumble of hectic school
life. Students are able to concentrate on their studies better as there are no distractions of
wondering vvho is the ‘coolest’ in the class and where everyone tits in the clothes competition.

Outside school, students are clearly identified. This is a good thing because they are
ambassadors for their school and, if they misbehave outside school, the school is easily
identified. A iear of bringing their school into disrepute, or a fear of being identified and their
teachers or parents notified, might prevent some antisocial behaviour, especially in big cities.
Conversely, good behaviour admired outside the school day could cause adults to see a
particular school in a good light and want their children to attend it w well behaved students
in uniform are an eloquent advertisement fortheir school. Very young children might aspire
to be pupils at that school when they are older because the students inspire them by their
exemplary behaviour.

On the other hand, some students are not so keen on wearing uniform, arguing that it
suppresses their individuality and freedom to express themselves. What is the point, they say,
in everyone being identically dressed? Doesn’t that lead to robots rather than human beings,
a bland group oi people vvho are unable to think for themselves orto be creative? Others
might say that parents have to buy yet more clothes for their children when they have to buy
school shirts, trousers, ties, even special shoes, and so school uniform costs rather than saves
money in the family, and puts an extra burden on the finances of a family. This is clearly more
significant in a family with a limited income.15 Writing summaries which are relevant and GOIIEI'EIII

Cycle Rickshaws in Dhaka

So crowded are the city centre streets of Dhaka that sometimes the cycle rickshaw is the
fastest means of transport. But cycle rickshaws can also be dangerous. Weaving in and out of
tratfic may save time but it is not always safe. Rickshaw cyclists sometimes try to shorten their
journey times by going against the line ofoncoming cars, and run the risk of being knocked off
their cycles and seriously injured.

Damage to cycle rickshaws has become quite commonplace too  it is easy to dent a tyre as
you accidentally bump into the kerb in your attempt to dodge a wide vehicle like a bus or a car.
Scraping the wheel of a cycle can also occur in this way, and it can be so expensive to have a
cycle repaired that it causes financial hardship in many households. Cyclists would be safer if
they wore helmets, but unfortunately they don’t, as again this would put additional strain on
the family budget. Passengers in cycle rickshaws would be safer ifthey were strapped in, but
there are no safety belts installed in these colourful vehicles.

With a partner, pick out and write down clusters of words or even whole sentences which are either:
. material which merely repeats a previously made point
- material which gives particular information merely illustrating a previously made point

- material which is a topic sentence, or introduction, to the question.

A word about the assessment of

relevance

When you make a list of content points in the first part of a summary question, under ‘Notes’,
you may come up with any number of points between none at all (and that is to be avoided!)
ortwelve, thirteen, fourteen, even fifteen orsixteen. When your teacher is assessing your work
after you have written up your notes into a piece of relevant and coherent formal continuous
prose, and even underexamination conditions, this numberwill not be checked. in other
words, if you made eleven content points under ‘Notes’, these eleven points remain, and
would be given eleven marks ifthe exercise was done under examination conditions When
assessing the work you do, in writing up your notes into a piece of relevant and coherent
formal continuous prose, no teacher or Examiner checks the number of content points you
have made in that piece ofwriting.

However, as a general rule, the number of content points you have made in the piece of
writing under relevant and coherent formal continuous prose will partly determine the credit
you are given when it is assessed. lfyou have an excellent understanding ofthe task, this will
be demonstrated in a large number ofthe passages points, ideas or arguments. Conversely,
if your understanding of the task is limited, this will be reflected in far fewer of the passages
points, ideas or arguments In practice this means that you need not reproduce every single
point you made under ‘Notes’, and this will not be checked when you write yoursummary

as a piece ofwriting which is relevant and coherent. However, the greater number of content
points you reproduce the better when it comes to assessment of relevance.

10115 Writing summaries which are relevant and GDIIBI'BIII l

102

 
 
  

x
Coherence '

Summaries which are coherent are easy to follow. One ofthe ways of making sure your
summary is easy to follow is to write it in Standard English.

Standard English means vocabulary which would be understood by all speakers of English,
in other words vocabulary which would be found in an English dictionary, free from slang or
jargon Standard English sentence structures would be understood by all speakers of English
and would not infringe any ofthe rules of English grammar.

£7

 

Another signpost of coherence, that is the extent to which your piece ofwriting is easy

to follow, is the way in which it is written in a natural, unstilted style. One way ofdoing
this is to combine information in compound or complex sentence structures. This is not
obligatory, but often helps the flow of a piece ofwriting. If the sentence structures which
you use are compound or complex, but copied from the text, you will not make as good
an impression on teachers as you would ifyou wrote in original compound or complex
sentence structures, i.e. sentence structures that have been created by you and not by the
writer ofthe original passage.

4 .t 

Copying whole stretches of structures from a text means you run a greater risk of copying
over material which is not relevant. Writing original compound or complex sentence
structures, as well as writing original simple structures, means you are using your own
words. This is not assessed separately, but will help with the general coherence of the piece
ofwork which you produce.

\
Signposts of compound and complex

sentences

- More than one finite verb: Sentences with only one finite verb are called simple
sentences. An example of a simple sentence is: ‘The boys played cricket’.

- The conjunctions ‘and’ or ‘but’: What could have been written as two or more simple
sentences have been combined to create a single compound sentence, i.e. a sentence
where each part is of equal value and could stand on its own as a simple sentence. An
example of a compound sentence is: ‘The sun shone and the boys played cricket’.

- Conjunctions other than ‘and’ and ‘but’: What could have been written as two or more
simple sentences have been combined to create a single complex sentence, i.e. a sentence
where only one part could stand on its own as a simple sentence.

The other parts of the complex sentence are secondary to, or subordinate to, the main,
independent part ofthe sentence. An example ofa complex sentence which has been
created using two conjunctions is: ‘Before their mothers called them in forlunch, the boys
played cricket because the sun was shining?

 

Examples of conju nctions other than ‘and’ and ‘but’ include ‘when’, while’, ‘after’, ‘before’,
‘because’, ‘until’.15 Writing summaries which are relevant and comm"!

o A relative pronoun, i.e. ‘who’, ‘whom’, ‘whose’, ‘which’ and ‘that’;
sentence which has been created using a relative pronou ‘ ;‘
that the boys could play cricket?

 

Exercise 2: Conjunction
Combine the following sentences by using conjunctions. An example has been done for yoU.
Lucky was excrted going to school. She was going to be studying sentence str ucruie  [’77qu :r '

Answer: Lucky was excited going to school because she was going to be studying scare/aux ‘3,“ e   i 
English that day.

1 Lucky was very tired. She had been studying sentence structure all day.
2 Lucky got home. Her mother was there to greet her.
3 Lucky ate her lunch. She went straight to her room to study.

4 Lucky revised that day’s lesson on sentence structure. She felt very cheerful. She felt she
understood how to use conjunctions.

Exercise 3: Relative Pronouns
Combine the following sentences by using relative pronouns. An example has been done for you.

in Bangladesh there are many dedicated English teachers. All the teachers want all their students to
succeed.

Answer: in Bangladesh there are many dedicated English teachers who all want all their studenls to
succeed.

Notice that sometimes the word order has to be changed when combining sentences using relative
pronouns.

1 Tu‘len was an English teacher. He worked in a high school in Bangladesh.

2 Tulen taught English in a high school. The school had almost five hundred students.

3 Tulen met one of his former students. He had taught this student for three years of high school.
4 Tulen lived next door to Nath. He had taught Nath’s son for two years of high school,

Exercise 4: Present Participles

Combine the following sentences by using present participles. An example has been done for you.
lndrani wake up early. She/amped out olbed, eager to  to work.

Answer: Waking up early, lndraniiurnped our olbed. eager to go to vvark.

Notice that sometimes the word order has to be changed when combining sentences using present
participles.

1 lndrani walked to school. She met an old friend from high school.

2 They chatted together. They walked along the street.

3 lndrani heard that her friend was a teacher. She told her friend that she was a teacher too.
4

Her friend smiled. She told lndrani that she had heard from many colleagues that lndrani was a
wonderful teacher.

Exercise 4A: Studying for an Examination

Combine the following list ofsummary content points to produce a paragraph of Standard English,
with original complex sentence structures if possible. Write between 150 and 180 words, including
the opening ten words given below.

103Tl

 

 

 

 

 

104

 

15 Writing summaries which are l‘ﬂlﬂllﬂlll and coherent l
.i

Begin your answer like this:

Because Minhajul and Sajjad were students at the same school...
Minhajul invited Sajjad to his house
spent three hours there on Saturday
English examination coming up

worried about sentence structure

1
2
3
4
5 particularly worried about spelling
6 teacher had told them not to worry too much

7 teachers were kind about spelling

8 teachers did not deduct marks for every single error
9 Minhajul and Sajjad were hungry

10 they left their books on the table

11 they went to the kitchen

12 they drank some water

13 they ate some sandwiches

14 Minhajul’s mother came in from the shops

15 she asked them how their studies were progressing

Exercise 48
Swap your answer with a partner. For your partner’s summary:
1 Count the number ofsentences.
2 Check that they are all sentences. (Do they all have verbs? Do they all make sense on their own?)
3 Count the number of simple sentences, i.e. sentences with only one verb.
4 Check to see if there are any compound sentences, i.e. Sentencesjoined by ‘and’ or ‘but’.
5 Check to see ifthere are any complex sentences, and whether or not these are original.
6 For each complex sentence used, check the way in which the structure has been created, i.e.
- has a conjunction been used? (‘because’, ‘when’, ‘after‘, ‘before’, ‘since’, etc.)
- has a relative pronoun been used? (‘who’, ‘whose’, ‘whom’, ‘which’,’that’)
- has a present participle been used? (the part ofthe verb ending in ‘—/'ng’ e.g. ‘going’, ‘seeing’)

- have linking words been used appropriately? (‘however’, ‘moreover’, ‘nevertheless’,
‘furthermore’ etc.),

Exercise 4C

Take your own piece of work back from your partner. Study carefully what your partner has written.

Redraft your summary, trying to make the necessary corrections and/or improvements to it as
suggested by your partner.

Exercise 5A: A Newjob in Male

Begin your answer like this:
The flight from Pakistan was long and exhausting for Amrita . . .
1. Amrita was a mathematics teacher

2 she was pleased to have ajob in Male15 Writing summaries Wllilill are I'BIIWEIIII and GOIIGI‘GIII

she arrived in Male by boat from the airport
she checked into her new lodgings

she went for a walk to see her new surroundings

3
4
5
6 she went to the fish market
7 tuna was the main fish caught and sold

8 they lay around on the floor ofthe market
9 there was a strong smell of fish

10 and a lot a noise

ll shoppers were mainly women

12 the women selected the tuna they wanted

 

l3 and took it to the salesmen and it was weighed and paid for
14 Amrita bought a piece of tuna
15 she went back to her lodgings to have the tuna for supper

Exercise 53

Swap your answer with a partner. For your partner’s summary:

Count the number ofsentences.

Check that they are all sentences. (Do they all have verbs? Do they all make sense on their own?)
Count the number of simple sentences, i.e. sentences with only one verb.

Check to see if there are any compound sentences, i.e. sentencesjoined by ‘and’ or ‘but’.

Check to see if there are any complex sentences, and whether or not these are original.

mmbwww

For each complex sentence used, check the way in which the structure has been created, i.e.

o has a conjunction been used? (‘because’, ‘when’, ‘after’, ‘before’, ‘since’ etc.)

- has a relative pronoun been used? (‘who’, ‘whose’, ‘whom’, ‘which’ ,’that’)

- has a present participle been used? (the part of the verb ending in ‘ing’ e.g. ‘going’, ‘seeing’)

- {have linking words been used appropriately? (‘however’, ‘moreover’, ‘nevertheless’,
‘furthermore’ etc.).

Make a list of your findings for your partner. Your partner will be doing the same with your piece
ofwork.

Exercise 50

Take your own piece of work back from your partner. Study carefully what your partner has written.
Redraft your summary, trying to make the necessary corrections and/or improvements to it as
suggested by your partner.

Exercise 6A: Light Street and Heavy Street

Combine the following list of summary content points to produce a paragraph of Standard English,
with original complex sentence structures if possible. Write between 150 and 180 words, including
the opening ten words given below.

Begin your answer like this:

The volume of traffic in streets produces contrasts between them . ..

l in Light Street (street with light traffic) people consider the street as home territory

2 in Heavy Street (street with heavy traffic) only the building they live in is considered as home
3 in Light Street people make use of the street

people sit on the front steps and chat in Light Street

children play on the pavements in Light Street

SHUT-b

Heavy Street is seen as a corridor between the safety of individual homes and the outside world

10515 Wl'ilillﬂ summaries which are l'ﬂllﬂlﬂlll and coherent J

7 there is no community feeling in Heavy Street
8 people keep to themselves in Heavy Street

9 in Heavy Street motorists view pedestrians, cyclists or children playing in the street as
intruding into their space

10 as the speed of the traffic increases in Heavy Street the attitude of motorists to pedestrians
becomes increasingly ruthless

11 in Heavy Street the pavement eventually disappears

12 there are no more pedestrians or children playing in the street

13 the pavement becomes a no-man’s land and the street loses its main attraction
14 people on Heavy Street no longer use their front gardens

15 they cannot relax in their gardens because of the continual noise

Exercise GB
Swap your answer with a partner. For your partner’s summary:
1 Countthe number ofsentences.
2 Check that they are all sentences. (Do they all have verbs? Do they all make sense on their own?)
3 Count the number of simple sentences, (i.e. sentences with only one verb).
4 Check to see ifthere are any compound sentences, (i.e. sentences joined by ‘and’ or ‘but’).
5 Check to see if there are any complex sentences, and whether or not these are original.
6 For each complex sentence used, check the way in which the structure has been created, Le.
- has a conjunction been used? (‘because’, ‘when’, ‘after‘, ‘before’, ‘since’ etc.)
- has a relative pronoun been used? (‘who’, ‘whose’, ‘whom’, ‘which), ’that’)
- has a present participle been used? (the part ofthe verb ending in ‘ing’, eg. ‘going’, ‘seeing’)

- have linking words been used appropriately? (‘however’, ‘moreover’, ‘nevertheless’,
‘furthermore’ etc.)

Make a list ofyour findings for your partner. Your partner will be doing the same with your piece
ofwork.

10615 Wflllllﬂ SIIIIIIIIII'IIIS WIIIGII are I'IIIIWIIIII and GOIIOI'BIII

Exercise 6C

Take your own piece of work back from your partner. Study carefully what your partner has written,
Redraft your summary, trying to make the necessary corrections and/or improvements to it as
suggested by your partner.

Exercise 7A: The Changing Relationship between Man and Animals

Combine the following list of summary content points to produce a paragraph of Standard English,
with original complex sentence structures if possible. Write between 150 and 180 words, including
the opening ten words given below.

Begin your answer like this:

The farming of wild animals produced various changes in their 

‘  ‘

kOOONOWU'I-hWNi—I

Hl—‘l—Ii—I
le—‘O

l4
15

V. 1;: . 5E"

‘0'” ;.-.n
.3 s

*‘V l’

 x)" ‘ $3

 

the physical appearance of farmed animals changed

most farmed animals became smaller

some farmed animals developed more distinctive markings and/or bright colours
thejaw muscles in grazing animals became smaller

the faces of grazing animals became shorter

the brains of farmed animals became smaller

the senses of farmed animals became less acute

before the farming of animals, man respected the animals he hunted
man depended on animals for his needs, like food and clothing

the bones of animals became the weapons of man

hunters feared and admired the animals they hunted

in some societies animals were idolised as gods

farming certain species ofanimals led to a bond of mutual affection between them and the
farmers

shepherds often risked their lives to rescue their lambs

dogs and horses became inseparable companions of their masters.

10715 Wl'ilillﬂ summaries WIIiGII are l'ﬂllWﬂlll and GDIIEI'EIII l

108

Exercise 78
Swap your answer with a partner. For your partner’s summary:

    

1 Count the number ofsentences.
2 Check that they are all sentences. (Do they all have verbs? Do they all make sense on their own?)
3 Count the number of simple sentences, i.e. sentences with only one verb.
4 Check to see if there are any compound sentences, i.e. sentencesjoined by ‘and’ or ‘but’.
5 Check to see if there are any complex sentences, and whether or not these are original.
6 For each complex sentence used, check the way in which the structure has been created, i.e.
- has a conjunction been used? (‘because’, ‘when’, ‘after’, ‘before’, ‘since’, etc.)
- has a relative pronoun been used? (‘who’, ‘whose’, ‘whom’, ‘which’, ’that’)
- has a present participle been used? (the part of the verb ending in ‘I'ng’eg. ‘going’, ‘seeing’)

- have linking words been used appropriately? (‘however’, ‘moreover’, ‘nevertheless’,
‘furthermore’ etc.)

Make a list of your findings for your partner. Your partner will be doing the same with your piece
of work.

Exercise 7C

Take your own piece of work back from your partner. Study carefully what your partner has written.
Redraft your summary, trying to make the necessary corrections and/or improvements to it as
suggested by your partner.

Exercise 8A

Make up your own list of summary points. These can be of a narrative nature or a discursive nature.
There should be fifteen points and you should provide the ten opening words.

Exercise SB

your partner has given you. Use the opening ten words your partner has provided. Write between
150 and 180 words, including the ten opening words. Write in relevant and coherent formal
continuous prose. Try to use a variety of sentence structures, some simple and some complex.
Check your spelling and punctuation. Check that you have created complex sentences by the

use of present participles or conjunctions or relative pronouns. Check that you have included no
irrelevant information.

Exercise 8C

Swap your work again with your partner. Write a short paragraph about the summary your partner
has produced with the content points you gave him/her. Assess the extent to which he/she has
written relevant and coherent error-free prose and the extent to which he/she has used a variety of
sentence structures.

Exercise 9

Look at what your partner has written about your summary: the good points and the points which
might be improved. Decide how your work on summary writing in relevant and coherent formal
continuous prose might be improved in the future.a;

 

A word about linking to produce
coherent writing

Sometimes a good way to produce a piece of coherent writing is to use linking words. These
may be adverbs or phrases, which show a continuation in the argument or points in the
passage, orwhich show a change ofdirection in the argument or points in the passage.

Some adverbs or phrases which show continuation include, ‘moreover’, ‘similarly’, ‘again’, ‘in
the same way’, ‘likewise’ and ‘furthermore’.

Some adverbs or phrases which show a change ofdirection include, ‘on the other hand’,
‘however’, ‘in contrast’ and ‘nevertheless’.

However, these words and phrases should not be used without clear understanding oftheir
purpose and they should be used sparingly. A liberal sprinkling ofsuch words, particularly if

their appropriateness is unclear, will do little to enhance a piece ofwriting and indeed may
spoil it.

109

   

l