110

  

Each exercise which follows gives you a sample ﬁrst draft summary. For each one, produce
a redratted version. This means you will have to:

correct any mistakes of grammar, punctuation, agreement, wrong preposition,
spelling

insert links such as ‘however’ or ‘furthermore’, wherea ro riate
)

combine groups of simple sentences into complex or compound sentences where
appropriate

redraft legibly and in your best handwriting.

Exercise 1: The Lighthouse 1

The ship’s crew noticed immediately that something was wrong because there were no
welcoming flag from lighthouse when the ship is near. Whistle and rocket are used, still
there is no response from those lighthouse keepers. The gates that should be open was
close, the door of the lighthouse was widely open.

The fire had not being lit for some time. The last entry ofthe lighthouse record book were
the fifteenth of december, this puzzled the searchers. The lamp covering with dust showing
that it also had not been lit for some time, the beds was unmade, Two ofthe three sets
waterproof clothing was missing from cupboard. The grass along the edge of cliff was torn
away when they investigate outside the lighthouse. The railings around the platform where
the crane stood was broken. A huge boulder which was part of cliff had been move a great
distance down the starecase and blocking it.

Exercise 2: The Lighthouse 2

The ship’s crew noticed immediately that something was wrong because the welcoming flag
should be wave for our welcome. They thought that the keepers may busy working out of
sight. The wistle was blown to call the keeper but no responce. The ship’s captain order his
crew to fire a rocket but it didn’t make the keepers noticed.

A small group ofsailor was ordered to check the area. They found out that the warning lamp
was working order and when they check the record book, it haven’t been filled for 11 days.
The sailor told their captain that they didn’t found the keepers, the next day they search the
lighthouse and found out that two ofthe three waterproof clothing was missing. The railing
around the platform was broken and huge boulder was move down stairway. There were no
trace of the three keepers later than. All the crew of the ships thinks there a mystery their.16 More nractice ill writing Gﬂllﬂl‘ﬂﬂl English

    

Exercise 3: The Lighthouse 3

 

The ship’s crew noticed immediately that something was wrong because there was no
welcoming flag flew from the ashore. The captain asked to fly a rocket over the island but still
nothing was seen of the keepers. Some sailors are order to find what happend inshore; they
started calling the keepers names and there is no answers. The entrance gate were closed, it
should be open by the keepers as they came there. The main door was open and again calling
the name of the keeper. in the kitchen too chairs stood next to the table and one of it knocked
over and lying on it’s side. The bedroom were unmade seems that the occupants had just risen
from them and left hurriedly. There is a this dirty dust over the warning lamp. They found two

waterproofclothing were missing and one still hung there. They also found that the grass had
been torn away along top edge of cliff.

Exercise 4: Threats to Coral Reefs 1

 

 

When hotel developers near coral reefs compete for land, thus raise it’s price and as result
forced local people to leave thier homes. intact, in some places, hotels have been built on
burial sites on the coast. Little by little the construction of golf courses for tourists have been
proved fatal to the coral reefs as the golf courses are treated by fertilisers, pesticides and large
amount of water when all ofsubstences contains deadly loads of waste materials and chemical.

However, airport runways are built and thos its construction produces to much waste which
are sufficient to kill coral. Local people lacking of food caused by the distruction of coral,
Even, the increase of pollution, noice, reeds and the destruction of natural habitats of animals
from the arrival of tourists. Sailing ships create severe on coral reefs with their heavy anchor,

coral continues to damage from the submarines power and diver also damage coral reefs
consideribly.

11116 More nraclice in writing coherent English

112

 

Exercise 5: Threats to Coral Reefs 2

When hotel develops near coral reefs compete for land they force local people out of they
homes, it is easy to understand the location of hotels in this magnificent areas but way (3‘? We
of country is exploitd to great extent. Tourist attractions like gollC courses deprives the tor-5i
people for shorelines which is necesary for their way of life.

Pollution is important factor in the destruction ofwondertul coastal areas. Pollutants 
dumped into the coral reels vvhich destroy life in the reel, the rock from coral reef have been
use on a small scale to build houses but the rocks are now been excavated in large quantities
for hotel development and yet again depriving the local people from their own houses.
tagoons are being dig deeper affecting the area where fish breed and the prices of popular
fish has been raised so high that the people cannot aford them, boats that carry people cages
severe damage to reefs.

Exercise 6: Threats to Coral Reefs 3

When hotel develops compete for land they forced local people out oitheir homes, the country
is frequently exploit for tourist entertainment, The construction of gollC courses for tourists
deprive local people of coastal area. The water used by golf courses drains out on the coral
reefs carries deadly load and chemical, building of airport along the coast are built on coral
reefs. Their construction produce large quantities of waste.

 

Rock from coral reef are taken in uncontroled quantities to built tourist hotel thus depriving
local people of building material Pleasure boat distroy the areas were fish breed, deprives
local people’s food, Some fish are too expensive because they can only afford by tourist.
Villages are destroyed by pollution created by tourists. Hugejetties and docks is built over coral
reefs, Hotel often lack of proper sewage facilities Boats carrying people to dive. These boats
increases the destruction of coral. Everyday boats send there anchors crashing dovvn on reef.