\

Summary writing

As we have seen in the previous chapters, the first stage in summary writing is the selection
of content points, in accordance with the question asked. You are free to write these
content points in note form or in sentences; you can also write them in the words ofthe
text or in your own words.

The next stage in summary writing is to write up these content points in relevant and
coherent formal continuous prose. Continuous prose means that it must be written in
sentences and at least one paragraph, clearly punctuated. You probably know what

is meant by formal writing, but some guidance on this will be given later. When you

write your content points in relevant and coherent formal continuous prose, you will be
assessed for the extent to which your writing is relevant to the task and coherent, i.e. easy
to follow. These are all skills which are required in good summary writing, and later we will
look at ways in which these skills can be developed and improved.

Organising and writing your summary

You have been given advice on organising a piece ofwriting in the section of the book on
Writing. Organising a summary is easierthan organising a piece ofComposition, where you
have only a topic to work on, and little or no guidance. Organising a summary is more like
organising a piece of Directed Writing, in which the task is detailed for you. So far, you have
written down the content points in a list. Now is the time to think about how to write up
these content points so that the best possible summary is produced with them.

Ifyou have produced your content points in note form, you will have to ﬂesh out the notes
into relevant and coherent formal continuous prose. Ofcourse, you may have decided to
write the content points already as coherent sentences and not notes. There are several
variables here. The important point is to know in advance of an examination your preferred
strategy ~ notes or sentences — at the first point ofthe summary writing, namely the
selection of content points. The day of any examination is too late to start experimenting.
Your teacher may wish to offer you a variety of strategies over your years of study, to
ascertain the method most appropriate to you.

Wl'ilillg summarv GOIIIBIII
noints: relevance and GOIIGSiD14 Writing SIIIIIIIIEIW content noinls: relevance and cohesion

Paragraphing your summary

Paragra phing your summary is easy. Because it is a short piece ofwriting, it may be written in
a single paragraph. In cases where there is more than one section to the rubric you may find it
more logical to use each section to write a separate paragraph. But there is no need to do so
— it’s up to you. You will be neither penalised nor rewarded in examinations forthe number
of paragraphs which you use to write your summary. The same is not the case, of course, in
Composition and Directed Writing, with which the section on Writing in this book deals.

The length of your summary

The rubric usually indicates the recommended number ofwords you should use in your
summary, and the range is quite wide, possibly between 150 and 180 words. You are not
likely to be penalised for exceeding that limit. However, you will not have enough space to
write much more than the recommended number ofwords in any case; furthermore, long
summaries are selfrpenalising, as a long summary loses the focus ofwhat a summary is
intended to be and becomes verbose, thus lacking the coherence that would make it easy to
follow. You may also be tempted to include details which are irrelevant to the task.

On the other hand, there is no benefit in writing much below the recommended number of
words, because if you use considerably fewer words than the number prescribed in the rubric,
you will probably penalise yourself by not writing enough content points.

Correct punctuation

lfyou are studying under an English curriculum, it is generally assumed that you are familiar
with the basic rules of punctuation — in other words, that you can use full stops and capital
letters accurately in orderto produce correct sentences. You will already have done some
work on sentence structure and punctuation in the section of this book on Writing.

Exercise 1: Punctuation

Check your basic punctuation skills by redrafting the following passage using correct punctuation.

the moment had arrived all those weeks of preparation had been moving them towards this
day it was a difficult syllabus but the Class had had a good teacher how happy they were about
that all the students filed into the examination hall with butterflies in their stomachs was there
anyone who was not realty nervous what would the comprehension passage be about this year
would it be narrative or discursive would it suit everyone everyone was silent the papers were
give out they were thinking about what they had been taught about literal comprehension and
inferential comprehension not to forget of course the summary question which carried half

of the marks everyone started to read the passage but they could not believe their eyes it was
impossible to understand there was no punctuation whatsoever.14 Writing summary eeMenl mints: relevanee and cohesion 1

Exercise 2

Go back to the lists of content points you made in Chapter 12 for each of the short passages in
exercises 4,5 and 6. For each of these, write the list of content points into a paragraph.

Your paragraphs should be headed as follows:
- Cafe India
- A frightening experience

- Anna.

Exercise 3

Go back to the lists of content points you made for each of the passages in exercises 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6 in Chapter 13 . For each ofthese, write the list of content points into a paragraph.

Your paragraphs should be headed as follows:
o Queen

- The Lonely Lighthouse

c School Uniform

- Titanic

- Cycle Rickshaws in Dhaka

- Tourists in Sri Lanka.

98