20 More about tact
gathering questions

Now that you have examined a variety ofwritten texts and completed some exercises on
them, it is time to think about the skills that you need to develop in Reading for Meaning.

Reading for Meaning is different from Reading for ideas. Reading for Meaning deals with
your ability to demonstrate skills in Assessment Objective R1 and Assessment Objective R2,
which are to show understanding of explicit meaning and to show understanding of implicit
meaning. As you may realise from these objectives, there are a range ofskills within Reading
for Meaning and therefore there are several types ofquestions which test them. You will be
working through the different types of questions in the chapters which follow.

There are techniques which you can learn to make the process ofanswering questions
easier, so that you are more likely to be successful. For example, you need to ask yourself
the following.

- Is the answer lying on the surface of the text or is there something I need to work
out?

- How long need my answer be?

- How short is my answer allowed to be?

- Am I allowed to use the words oftheoriginaltext?

- Do I need to use my own words?

- is the question asking only about the story or argument ofthe text?

o Is the question asking about particular features of language, for example figures of
speech, or the way language is used to invite evaluation of character or plot?20 More about fact gathering llllﬂSlillllS l

\L ,

iteral and inferential comprehension

The key to distinguishing between literal and inferential questions lies in the difference
between Assessment Objectives R1 and R2.

Assessment Objective Rl requires
and Assessment Objective R2 req
meanings and attitudes’.

you to ‘demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings’
uires you to ‘demonstrate understanding of implicit

We will start with answers to the first question above.

Is the answer lying on the surface of the text or is there something i need to work out?

In literal comprehension questions, the answer li
the answer is explicit. in inferential comprehensi

something out, to make a deduction, based on t
answer is implicit.

es on the surface of the text; in other words,
on questions, you are required to work
he information in the text; in other words, the

For example

The sky was grey and full of heavy clouds Rain ran in little rivers down the roads and

traffic was travelling much more slowly than usual

 

Question 1: What was the weather like that day?

Answer: it was raining.

The answer to this question lies on the sur

in the text and is reinforced by the referen
comprehension question.

face of the text. The word ‘rain’ occurs
ce to the cloudy sky. This is a literal

 

124

 

 51. wrnn'Question 2: From the evidence given in the text, wh
more slowly than usual?

Answer 1: The traffic was travelling more slowly than usual be

I cause itwas rainin and
there might have been an accident ifthey had trav g

elled at a normal speed.

Answer 2: The traffic was travelling more slowly than usual because the drivers were
worried that they might skid on the wet road.

Answer 3: The traffic was travelling more slowly than usual because there was a trafficjam.

Both answers 1 and 2 are correct. Each answer makes a deduction, or inference, about the
text, namely that ifthe rain was running in little rivers down the road, it might be dangerous
for drivers to proceed at their normal pace. Answer 3 is incorrect because although it makes a
deduction, that deduction is not based on the information given in the text. Answer 3 comes
from the student’s imagination, not the text. There is no evidence whatsoever in the text of a
trafficjam.

Remember
The answers to literal comprehension questions lie on the surface ofthe text. The
answers to inferential questions do not lie on the surface ofthe text, but can be worked

out or deduced by looking at the context ofthe question, i.e. the area of text on which
the question is based. The first step in selecting the correct answer to a comprehension
question is to identify whether it is literal or inferential comprehension.

 

Signposts towards inferential comprehension questions include the following.

 

- Whydoyou think...

- Suggesta reason 

- Why might

- What possible explanation is there for...
- In what way could it be thoughtthat...

o How can you tell that 

Exercise 1: Literal and inferential Questions

Write down each of the following questions. Although they are not attached to any text, it should
be possible for you to tell which can be answered by literal comprehension and which require an
inference to be made. Beside each one write down whether it is signposted as a literal or as an
inferential question.

How many people were in the restaurant?

What was the name ofAnna’s brother?

Suggest a reason why the shop was empty.

At what time of day is the story set?

What possible explanation is there for Michael’s absence on that day?
Why might you be surprised to find that the trip was well organised?
Why did he not know where the sound was coming from?

Why do you think the writer tells us that the countryside was beautiful?

LDOONCDLn-h-(AJNi-J

What colour was the girl’s dress?

10 How might you be able to tell that thejourney was made during the night?

12520 More about tact gathering nuestions l

Exercise 2: City Life

What follows is a short passage with questions which can be answered by literal comprehension
Read the passage carefully and then answer the questions which follow.

126

 

Many oftoday’s major social problems have arisen because the population has been
crowded into urban areas. The drawbacks ofcity life are obvious: traffic, cost of living and
increased crime.

The advantages ofcity lite include access to work, services, education, entertainment and
friends. lfthe population ofa city were reduced by even ten per cent, the result would beia
major difference in property values and a deterioration in services paid for by public money,

like transport.

Give one advantage and one disadvantage ofcity life. [2]
Give one result of reducing the population ofa city by ten percent. ‘ [l]
[3 marks]

Exercise 3: Classroom Computers

What follows is a short passage with questions which can be answered by literal comprehension.
Read the passage carefully and then answer the questions which follow.

Some people are afraid that computers used in education will lead to a deterioration in
educational standards. However, anyone who has ever watched kids round a classroom
computer, or witnessed computer exchanges between students in classrooms separated by
oceans} knows that technology can actually improve the learning experience by making it
more enjoyable.

Despite a common view to the contrary, computers will not become a substitute for teachers.
indeed, computers will bring together the best work of countless teachers and students.

According to ‘some people’, what will be the result of using computers in the classroom? [1]
According to the writer, what aspect of technology leads to an improvement in education? [1]
What is the‘common view’ about computers? [1]
According to the writer, what is the advantage of using computers in the classroom? [1]

[4 marks]20 More about tact gathering questions

Exercise 4: Inferential Questions
Now answer these inferential questions on both ‘City Life’ and ‘Classroom Computers’.

1 lfthe population of a city were reduced, why do you think there would be ‘deterioration in

services’? ll]

2 Suggest a reason why the writer refers to ‘kids’ in the second line of the passage and to
‘students’ in the third line ofthe passage. [2]
[3 marks]

Now go back to some ofthe other questions posed at the start of this chapter.
- How long need my answer be?
o How short is my answer allowed to be?

The answer to these questions is simple. As long as you answerthe question, the length of
your answer doesn’t matter. You will not impress teachers with elaborate sentences. In fact,
as you will almost certainly be working against the clock, it is a good idea to keep your answer
to the shortest form possible, as long as you answerthe question, of course.

Look back at the answers to the inferential question on page 125: From the evidence given in
the text, why do you think the traffic was travelling more slowly than usual?

There were three answers for consideration, two ofwhich were acceptable and one ofwhich
was not. Each ofthe answers started:

- The traffic was travelling more slowly than usual because. . .

However, it would not have affected the correctness or otherwise of the answers if they had
simply been written as:

o ltwas raining and there might have been an accident ifthey had travelled at a normal speed.
- The drivers were worried that they might skid on the wet road.
- There was a trafficjam.

All ofthese sentences answerthe question (although the third is wrong) in a way which does
not repeat the stem ofthe question.

What these answers do is more than selection of information They also retrieve the
information necessary to answer the question, without wasting time in words which do not
contribute to a correct answer but merely pad out a correct answer. To retrieve information
is to do more than select it. lt is to home in on as small an area ofthe text as is sufficient

to answerthe given question. Retrieval of information imposes a kind of economy on your
answers to questions.

Remember

There is no need to copy out the stem ofthe question when you write an answerto it.

 

12720 more about tact gathering llllGSIiﬂllS f

Exercise 5: Writing Shorter Answers

What follows are some questions and answers. Even though you have not been given the original
texts, write answers shorter than those given below to show that your answer has been both
selected and retrieved.

Question 1: How can you tell that the girl is upset?

Answer: it is obvious that the girl is upset because she is crying.

Question 2: lfthe people had realised that the storm was coming, what precaution might they
have taken?

Answer: lfthe people had realised that the storm was coming they would have taken the

precaution of tying up all the boats in the harbour.
Question 3: From your reading of the passage, how many days was thejourney likely to last?
Answer: From my reading of the passage it seems likely that thejourney would last six day;

Question 4: Suggest a reason why, in spite ofthe rising cost of materials, the factory continued to
manufacture furniture.

Answer: In spite of the rising cost of materials, the factory continued to manufacture furniture
because it had been given a subsidy by the government.

Question 5: The writer refers to ‘an often expressed’ fear. What is this fear?

Answer: The ‘often expressed fear’ to which the writer refers is the fearthat soon there will be
a shortage of teachers.

Question 6: The writer states that ‘technology should be at the service of everyone’. Which group
ofcitizens does he fear will be the only ones to benefit?

Answer: He fears that, although technology should be at the service of everyone, the only
group to benefit will be the rich.

Question 7: Feelings between the two men became strained. From the evidence ofthe
paragraph, what is the first example of this tension?

Answer: The first example of feelings between the two men becoming strained was when they
stopped talking on thejourney.

Question 8: ‘Each man looked after himself’. What is surprising about this in view ofthejourney
they were undertaking?

Answer: It was surprising that each man looked after himself in view of thejourney they were
taking because it was a dangerousjourney and it would have been safer if they had
worked together.

Question 9: Apart from feelings ofwild excitement, how was Emma feeling at the end ofthe
marathon?

Answer: Apart from feelings of wild excitement, Emma was feeling exhausted at the end ofthe
marathon.

3;

 

1282|] More about tact gathering questions

In the following exercises, you will find passages with questions for you to answer.
Use the signposts you have learned to decide which questions are literal and which
are inferential. It is best to answer in sentences, but remember not to waste time in
repeating the stems of the questions in your answers.

Exercise 6: Exploring a Cave

Read the passage and then answer the questions which follow below.

U7 «5 LU M r—a

\lm

Exploring a cave can be an unpleasant experience: there is a damp, sometimes dusty smell
which seems "to be the same in all caves. You can see nothing; at first but, when your eyes adjusi:
to your unfamiliar surroundings? the strange light casts eerie shadows on the walls. Sometimes
you  aware of creatures like mice scurrying across your path

 

Eiyou are exploring  low cave, at the siarr, oi the walk sleeping is rather a joke out it is a
joke, that wears o” as soon as you have travelled a short distance. You not only have to bend;
you have also got to keep your head up so that you can see the roof orlhe cave. You have}
therefore  consran't pain in {he neck and aching ‘ihighs be: this is nothing compared to the
pain in your knees

 

Exile. aiooui a lolomeigre u oeeomos an unbearable agony "on begin to worry whether you W"!
ever get to the end  still more, how  earth you are going to  hack Your  grow: cloi :er
and slower in restonse io nhe vilificulties

onetime ii: is hard going underneath you: Feel, ymhjagged pieces of rock ﬁltering the ground
and irecoenl: pools: Al slagriant water. You Certainly need to trear‘ very slowly
Why does the writer describe exploring a cave as ‘unpleasant’? [1]
What does the writer suggest is frightening about explorin’r a cave? [1]
What would happen to someone walking in a cave who didn’t keep his head up? [2]
What is the worst pain experienced by someone walking in a low cave? [1}
What are the two main worries of a person walking in a low cave? [2]
Why do you think a walker’s pace ‘grows slower and slower’.7 [1}
What two aspects ofthe cave mean that the walker ‘needs to tread very slowly’? [2]
[10 marksl

129