1 Reading a variety of texts

in orderto build your reading skills, you should try day by day to increase your ability to
read a variety oftexts accurately and with conﬁdence. Almost certainly you are already
doing that, even ifyou have neverstopped to think about it.

Exercise 1

Working with a partner, make a list of the different types ofwritten English to be found in your
own homes.

The most obvious types will be books, and the most obvious division of books is into non—fiction
and fiction.

Exercise 2
Working with a partner, divide your list of types of written English into non~fiction and fiction.

For non-fiction, you might have something like this: biography, autobiography, travel,
information books on, for example, sport or entertainment. But other non-fiction material in
your home might also include recipe books, a telephone directory, magazines and manuals on,
for example, a computer or a washing machine.

For fiction texts, you might have something like this: science fiction, war, historical, crime,
romance, human interest, thriller, adventure, school, childhood. These broad headings for
fiction texts are called genres.

Having strong skills in reading English means that you
will be able to read a wide variety of texts. The more
experience you have of reading written English on your
own, the better you will develop these skills — and your
chances of succeeding in examinations.

The passages you are asked to read in an examination
will be either non-fiction or fiction, one of each.
Non-fiction passages may be from any one of a
variety of topics, whether about modern issues or

of a more historical nature; fiction passages may be
from any genre.

It is therefore extremely important to familiarise
yourselfwith different types of written English and be
able to recognise the characteristics ofdifferent types of
written English.11 Reading a variety I" texts l

80

Exercise 3

Working with a partner, read the following very short texts of written English. Write each one down
and beside each write whether it is non-fiction or fiction.

1 The damage being done to coral reefs in the twenty-first
century is a cause of great concern to governments and
environmentalists alike.

 

m
2 Standing in the shadows of the huge house’s garden, he
watched and waited. His opportunity would arise soon, he
was sure ofthat.
3 There can be no doubt that computers have brought about
a revolution in the way schools are run. EH

4 ‘What do you want?’ came the robotic voice from the other
space ship. Ajay stepped forward, terrified.

 

5 It was a terrifying sight all right. But at least, thought
Sachin, they would soon know the truth. It had been a long,
hard battle.

 

6 It was good that the two families were pleased at the

 

match. Already preparations were under way for the big day.

7 The girls crowded into the assembly hall, where the results
would be announced.

It was hard not to be anxious, although some girls
disguised it well by giggling nervously.

 

8 Television is undoubtedly a useful and pleasant means of
relaxation. it can also be educational.

 

9 The men marched on, their eyes dimmed with fatigue, their
feet blistered in their ill—fitting boots, the scream of
dropping shells behind them.

 

10 Many foods contain high amounts of unsaturated fat, which
is unfortunately contributing to increased levels of obesity

in some parts of the world.

 

Exercise 4

Working with a partner, look back at the texts in the previous exercise which you havejudged to be
fiction. Against each, write down what genre of fiction you consider it to be. At the end of your list
of texts from the previous exercise, write a sentence of your own in which, by referring closely to
the language of the text, you justify your choice of genre.

Exercise 5

Write ten short texts of your own, each one not more than thirty words. Write five fiction and five
non-fiction texts. It should be clear from the language of each text whether it is fiction or non-
fiction, and what genre each ofthe five fiction texts is.

Exercise 6

Swap your ten texts with a partner. Copy each of your partner’s ten texts. Beside each one write
whether it is fiction or non-fiction and, in addition, write beside each fiction text what genre it is.
When both you and your partner have finished this exercise, swap your work back and correct it for
each other. Take time out to explain errors which have occurred in identifying the texts.11 Beading a variety 0' texts

Exercise 7

This is an exercise which must be started at home. Bring in to class six types of writing from your
own home. These should be a mixture of fiction and non~fiction, and different fiction genres.

Prepare a short talk to the class in which you identify your texts as fiction or nonfiction, identify
fiction genres, and single out features of language, giving examples of particular words and
phrases which back up your identification.

The purposes ofthe exercises covered so far in this chapter are to highlight the different
types of written English which you already know and to help you to focus on the means of
identifying these different types ofwritten English. This in turn will help you to cope with
whatever type of comprehension text you are asked to deal with in examinations and to
sharpen your focus and hence your ability to perform well.

The most basic task foryou in any reading situation is to glean information, which might be
no more than simple facts.

Exercise 8 : A Visit to My Grandparents

Read the following short passage, which is fiction, childhood genre, and write down three pieces of
information which are contained in it.

i was finding it hard going, pushing on the pedals. The tyres slipped on the stones and the clods
ofdry earth. The closer i got to the house, the biggerthe yellow house grew in front of me, and
the heavierthe weight that crushed my chest, taking my breath away.

My grandparents lived there, but what if they thought i shouldn’t be out on my bike on my own?
What if they phoned my mother and asked her to come right over to collect me, bike and all”?
How grown up would i feel then?

Exercise 9: Computers in Education

Read the following short passage, which is non—fiction, discursive genre, and write down three
pieces Of information which are contained in it.

 

Computers in the classroom have brought about a revolution in education, No longer are all
lessons taught by the teacher using the board and a piece of chalk, or by children reading
books, These methods of learning have their place of course, and art invaluable one at that, out

computers allow individual learning—“children can also work at their own pace, which increases

their motivationv

11 Reading a variety [It "HIS ’

Exercise 10: Another Working Day

Read the following short passage, which is fiction

crime genre, and write down three pieces of
information which are contained in it.

Sergeant Smith was not very fond of his boss, the Chief So

reasonable working relationship, which wasjust as well, thought Sergeant Smith, as the two
of them drove to their latest crime scene~a house where the owner had been attacked by two
young men who had broken in to steal anything ofvalue they could find, especiallyjewellery,

perintendent. But they had 3

Exercise 11: The Retreat

Read the following short passage, which is fiction

war genre, and write down three pieces of
information which are contained in it.

The air was grey with diesel fumes, and straggling wearil

y through the stench, and forthe
moment moving faster than the traffi

c, were hundreds of soldiers, most ofthem carrying their
rifles and their awkward greatcoats—ea burden in the morning’s growing warmth. Walking with

the soldiers were families hauling suitcases, bundles, babies, or holding the hands of chil
The onty human sound Turner heard, piercing the
50M}?!

dren,
din of engines, was the crying of babies,

 

 

.w‘r'm  hi,» ism lurch, an

Exercise 12: Space Travel

Read the following short passage, which is non—fiction, di

scursive genre, and write down three
pieces of information which are contained in it.

 

Perhaps the strongest proof ofthe ingenuity of mankind is the fact that human beings have
begun the exploration of space, People in the second halt oi the twentieth century saw men
walking on the surface oft'ne moon, which a short time before most have seemed more like
science fiction than reality, Spacecraft in orbit has become a iarnil
phenomenon, and we are no longer surprised to hear

newspapers or television.

Ear,  not a commonplace
about the expioration ofspace in

9I 11 Reading a variety ot texts 

Exercise 13: Nelson Mandela

Read the following short passage, which is non—fiction, autobiography genre, and write down three
pieces of information which are contained in it.

 

When l was not much more than a newborn Child, my father was involved in a dispute that
deprived him of his chieftainship at Mvezo and revealed a strain in his character i believe he
passed on to his son. l maintain that nurture, rather than nature, is the primary moulder of
personality, but my father possessed a proud sense of rebelliousness, a stubborn sense of
fairness, that E recognise in myself

DOUWE, iiom tong rip/k to Freeoom Dy Nelson ixiarioeia

Exercise 14: Examinations

Read the following short passage, which is nonefiction, discursive genre, and write down three
pieces of information which are contained in it.

There can be no doubt that the examination season is a tense time for students. Months, and
sometimes years, of preparation have gone into each examination, and students ieel under
great pressure to perform to the best of their ability and achieve their potential. Son'ietimes
their parents, however unwittingly: add to their pressure by talking about the examination
results oi other members oithe family, stressing how important it is to succeed at school if one
is to succeed in life. Teachers, too, in their desire to prepare their tiasses well tor the impending
examinations, put an additional burden on to the poor students, who sometimes dread the
possibility of letting down their hardworking teachers who have done so much for them.

83