140

 

answer in your own words. in an own words question, you go beyond merely selecting and
retrieving the information required to answerthe question.

Go back to a question asked at the start ofChapter 22.
- Do i need to use my own words?

We have already established that the answerto this question is thatyou may use the
words of the text unless the question tells you specifically not to. In cases where you are
required to answer in your own words, the question wording will make that clear.

Answering an own words question means that you will have to render key words from
the text into words which do not come from the text. Usually, in an examination, you

will not be required to select and retrieve these words from the text yourself, as they will
be incorporated into the question you are asked, although this chapter includes some
questions where you are required to select and retrieve the key words yourself before re~
casting them into your own words.

Example 1

in time, our early ancestors learned to communicate knowledge to one another This
enabled them to find more food.

 

 

your own words. Such questions are usually clearly signposted in an examination — there
are no tricks therel Similarly, you must realise that, ifyou do not use your own words, you
are wasting your time. Lifting is pointless in an own words question.

Me.l 24 Answering in your own words 
Step 2

The next step in answering this question is to be sure ofthe key words you are being asked
to re—cast into words or expressions ofyour own. Careful reading ofthe question and the text
should lead you to see that ‘Communicate’ and ‘knowledge’ are the key words.

Step 3

The ﬁnal step in answering this question is to evaluate the key words you are being asked
to re—cast into words or expressions of your own. This means that you must weigh up their
meaning in the text and come up with synonyms or other equivalents

So your synonyms for ‘communicate’ might be ‘pass on’, ‘te/l’, ‘share’ or ‘inform’, while your
synonyms for ‘know/edge’ might be ‘i’nformat/on’, ‘what they had learned’ or ‘what they had
found out’.

Your answer might be: They passed on to one another what they had found out.

Notice that we established that own words questions ask for synonyms or other equivalents.
You do not need to give a single word to rercast a single word. Nor do you need to give the
same part ofspeech, i.e. a noun for a noun or a verb for a verb. So ‘what they had learned’ is a
perfect answerto re—cast ‘knowledge’ although it is not a single word answer. However, ‘what
they know’ would not be an acceptable answer because ‘know’ is a derivative of ‘knowledge’
which means that it comes from the same family.

Remember

In an own words question, a single word synonym is not necessary for a correct answer.
However, answering in a derivative of the key word will not be acceptable to teachers.

Example 2

The islands isolated location and hostile weather meant that the lighthouse tOok
fouryears to complete.

 

Question: What features of the island meant that it took fouryears to build the lighthouse?
Answer in yourown words.

Step 1
This is an own words question.

Step 2
Key words are ‘iso/ated’ and ‘hosti/e’.

Step 3
Possible synonyms for isolated a re ‘far away’, ‘lone/y’, ‘separated’, a nd ‘cut off’. Possible
synonyms for ‘host/‘le’ are ‘unkind’, ‘fnc/ement’, ‘nasty’, ‘bad’.

Answer: It took fouryears to build because the island was far away and because of
bad weather.

14124 Answering ill your DWI] WOI'IIS l

142

Exercise 1

Answer the own words questions attached to the short passages below.

10

I Speeding downhill on a bicycle

When Jennifer stepped from the car, she was horrified at the scene ofdevastation before her

in your own words, explain how Jennifer felt when she stepped from the car, and the reaSOn
why she felt this way.

The rush hourtraffic crawled along the road, smoke billowing from exhaust pipes.
In your own words, describe the rush hourtraffic.

Undoubtedly, the reduction in government spending on education will lead to deterioration in
literacy.

According to the writer, the result of the reduction in government spending on education will
lead to ‘a deterioration in literacy’. Explain in your own words what this means.

The creepers grew in profusion around the house, and even coiled round the window sills

Explain in your own words what the writer tells us about the creepers by telling us that they
‘grew in profusion’ and ‘coiled around the window sills’.

in the past, governments have sometimes taken strong action to preserve an environment
which has been threatened. Unfortunately, these governments have often disregarded the
views of the people living there.

Using your own words, explain what mistakes were made, according to the writer, by
governments in the past which tried to preserve an environment which had been threatened.

Speed boats take tourists every day outto the corai reefs. This leads to the inevitable

destruction of the reefs.

According to the writer, the result of tourists’ speed boat trips to the coral reefs leads to their
‘inevitable destruction’. Explain in your own words what this means.

With mounting astonishment, the captain saw that there was nobody in or around the
lighthouse.

The captain reacted to the fact that there was nobody in or around the lighthouse ‘with
mounting astonishment’. Explain in your own words what his reaction was.

is an experience which is both exhilarating and terrifying.

The writer describes the experience of speeding downhill on a bicycle as both ‘exhilarating and
terrifying’. Explain in your own words what this means. ’

Even today, coral reefs are still essential to people living in the tropics, whether used to
manufacture tools or simply to adorn their houses.

Coral reefs are still essential to people living in the tropics as they are used to ‘manufacture
tools or simply to adorn their houses.’ Explain in your own words the uses made of coral by
people living in the tropics.

it seems likely that, in the future, schemes for the protection of coral reefs will be initiated and

supervised by local people.

protection of coral reefs.

Exercise 2

Read the passage below and answer the own words questions which follow.

Out of all the huts the villagers were reluctantly emerging _ the children first: they were
inquisitive and unfrightened.

The lieutenant barked out, ‘Attention. All of you. Listen to me. Anyone who shelters him is a
traitor too.’ Their immobility infuriated him. He said, ‘You’re fools if you still believe what the
priests teil you.’

Source. from “is do

 r'r n'wz’ the Glory b1, Graham (“eeriel 24 Answering in Item own words l

1 The children were ‘inquisitive and unfrightened’. In your own words, explain the effect the

arrival of the lieutenant had on the children. [2]
2 What had ‘infuriated’ the lieutenant? Answer in your own words. [1]
[3 marks]

Signposts in own words questions

Just as we saw that there are signposts in inferential questions, in the same way there are
signposts in own words questions. The obvious signpost is that the question asks you to use
your own words. However, a more subtle signpost might be a quotation from the passage.
This quotation might be a single word, an expression or even a whole sentence. (in the last
question, the quotation signpost was the word ‘infuriated’.)

Quotations can be signposts which direct you to the area of text where you will find the key
words, i.e. the words which you have to select, retrieve and evaluate so that you can put them
into yourown words.

Remember

lfyou are given quotation signposts in own words questions, use them to help you to
find the key words, i.e. the words you will have to put into your own words.

 

Exercise 3
Read the passage below and answer the own words questions which follow.

Once the newspapers got hold of the story, there was much speculation, most of it
unconvincing. The mystery has never been conclusively solved, but for over a century many
explanations as to what happened have been suggested. One theory is that violence broke out
and one of the lighthouse keepers murdered his colleagues and threw them over the cliff; he
then jumped over the cliff himselfthrough shame at what he had done. A second, less fanciful,
theory is that two of the men get up early to repair the devastation of a night of particularly
inclement weather.

Source: from Scottish Myste/les by Donald M. Fraser

1 According to the writer, what happened ‘once the newspapers got hold of the story’?
Answer in your own words. [2]
Cambridge 0 Level English Language 1120 PrIperZ O7 0, iune 2005

2 The mystery ‘has never been conclusively solved’. Explain in your own words what

this means. [2]
3 The second theory as to what happened is ‘less fanciful’. Explain in your own words
what this means. [2]
4 According to the second theory, why did two of the men get up early? Answer in your
own words. l3]
[9 marks]

143

 

.r.l 24 Answering in your nwn words i

    

Exercise 4

Read the passage below and answer the own words questions which follow.

As communities grew and developed, the greater the variety of goods there was to inspect for
bartering. So it became more and more difficult to decide what one thing was worth compared

with another. Eventually, a very basic form of money appeared, often things such as knives,

sword or axe-heads, made in a small size. Being fashioned out of metal, they had a special

value, since it required a good deal of labour to extract them from the earth. Eventually, a

currency emerged which would remain popular for a very longtime and over a wide area, /
and that was the cowrie shell. What made cowrie shells a unique form of currency was they

defied any sort of imitation. However, cowrie shells were shipped abroad in increasingly large
quantities. This meant that through time their value as money was diminished.

1 According to the writer, what happened ‘as communities grew and developed’?

Answer in your own words. [2]
2 Metal objects acquired a special value as money because ‘it required a good deal of
labour to extract them from the earth’. Explain in your own words what this means. [2]
3 What made cowrie shells a reliable form of money? Answer in your own words. [2]
4 ‘Cowrie shells were shipped abroad in increasingly large quantities’.
Explain in yourown words what this means. [2]
5 What happened to cowrie shells ‘through time’? Answer in your own words. [2]
[10 marks]
Adaploci horn Larry r. 7w  9 w  i " “yum lMfr/u“:ch1320“one: 2, lVGV‘ci’!I/Dz-‘f[Ur/,9

144