4 nescrinlive writing

.

 

Composition usually presents you with a selection of five titles from which you must
choose one to write about. These titles cover a range of different types of writing. However,
teachers expect you to write about your personal experiences or opinions; you do not have
to pretend to be someone you are not in orderto impress them.

When you are thinking about which topic you should choose to write about, try to keep the
following points in mind:

- you only have a limited period oftime to plan and write youressay
- planning is important but do not produce an over—elaborate plan

o choose a topic which does not require you to spend too long thinking about what
you should write — as far as possible write about something which is closely familiar
to you

- you should be aware ofthe type ofwriting you are best at; try to choose the topic
which lets you write this type of essay

- rememberthat your‘work will bejudged by teachers as much on how you express
yourselfas on the content. Using accurate grammatical structures and appropriate
vocabulary is also equally important.

In general, Composition involves five different types ofwriting, namely descriptive writing,
argumentative writing, discursive writing, personal account and narrative writing. All of
these will allow you to present your own personal views and feelings. Sometimes, one
title will cover more than one type ofwriting. Here is a selection of essay titles taken from
orsimilarto those found in examination papers with the type ofwriting each requires
indicated in brackets.

1 Describe an important person living in your community and say why you admire
him/her. (Descriptive)

2 Write about an occasion when a special family meal produced unexpected results.
(Personal Account)

/:L’Ji."i,ljlii’f_7i"' I? c: Uri." Fulﬁl? [Julia/{15,10 7120/3110»?! ,7 Sriv'tsoiwi. (triﬂe Eli/“14“

3 You once made a decision that caused problems for a friend. Write about what the
decision was and what happened as a result of it. (Personal Account)

4 Should we worry so much about endangered species? What is yourview?
(Argumentative)

.v Ctr waif/nylontwat/{11):} iijuiﬁ'mwr i Sharon/i, ,izinr AW

5 Write a story which begins with the words, ‘It was only when l arrived at the house
thatl realised i had forgotten  (Narrative)4 Ilescrintive writing

As you can see, no matterwhat type ofwriting is required, at least four ofthese topics allow
you to write from your direct personal experience.

Topic 5 provides the opportunity to make up a fictional narrative ifyou wish, but there’s no
reason why you could not write from personal experience, ifthat seems appropriate

Now let us look at these different types ofwriting more closely.

 

Descriptive writing

The descriptive topic is in some ways meant for one ofthe more straightforward pieces of
writing and allows you to write about something with which you are familiar. It is also likely to
capture the interest ofthe person who is reading it.

There are different types of descriptive essay topics:
o a description ofa place or a scene or a building
- a description of an event or an occasion

- a description ofa person or an animal.

This is a fairly simple list and you can almost certainly think of othervariations. However, the
common factor is that in all ofthem you can write personally about your perception ofwhat is
being described.

When you are writing undertime constraints, it is much better to write about something

or someone that is familiarto you than to worry about having to make something up. For
example, conjure up in your mind a clear picture ofa place you know well to give you a basis
foryour description. Once you have done this, you can then add some extra details (which
can, of course, be made up) to make it more interesting.

Exercise 1

Here are some examples of different types of descriptive writing. Read through each of them
carefully and, in discussion with a partner, decide on the features that make them effective
passages of descriptive writing. List examples of words and phrases and explain why they help to
convey the scene or people being described to the readers. Try to describe and comment on the
writers’ tone of voice. Do not read the comments which follow until you have done this.

Passage: (a) Kundili

We arrived at Kundili after a four'hour drive to find a seething multitude, drawn from 

number oftribes, gathered into a mile—wide dust bowl at the conjunction ofthe main road into
Andhra Pradesh and a number of country byways leading down from the hills. Under the hard
forthright midday sun it was a sight to guarantee eye/strain  eventual headaches. The sky
was bleached white, with drifts in it ofwhat appeared at first as red smoke blowing across, but
which proved to be the bloodwed dust, which lay a quarter-inch deep on every surface, caught
up by the gusting wind. When the dust was blown across the sun it turned dark, swelled up and
seemed to tremble. From all points ofthe market came the piercing glitter of metal articies for
sale, from sheets of corrugated iron, pots and pans, and above all from the rows of polished
aluminium receptacles for sale.

Bouitr: from Al

 

i - wiles;‘51oiic~, ix; ixz‘oimiin Lem;4 nescrintive writing l

30

Passage: (b) Istanbul

Sighing, l smeared a little ofthe brown water around my face, then went out to see lstanbul.

It is the noisiest, dirtiest, busiest city We ever seen. Everywhere there is noiseucar horns
tooting, sirens shrilling, people shouting, muezzins wailing, ferries on the Bosphorus sounding
their booming horns. Everywhere, too, there is ceaseless activity—«people pushing carts,
carrying trays of food or coffee, humping huge and ungainly loads (i saw one guy with a sofa on
his back), people every five feet selling something: lottery tickets, wristwatches, cigarettes,
replica perfumes.

Every few paces people come up to you wanting to shine your shoes, sell you postcards or
guidebooks, lead you to their brother’s carpet shop or otherwise induce you to part with some
trifling sum of money.

 

Along the Galata Bridge, swarming with pedestrians, beggars and load bearers, amateur
fishermen stood pulling the most poisonedmlooking fish i ever hope to see from the oily waters
below. At the end of the bridge two guys were crossing the street to Sirkeci Station, threading
their way through the traffic leading brown bears on leashes. No one gave them a second
glance. lstanbul is, in short, one of those great and exhilarating cities where almost anything
seems possible.

The one truly unbearable thing in the city is the Turkish pop music, it is inescapable. it assaults
you from every restaurant doorway, from every lemonade stand, from every passing cab. if you
can imagine a man having an operation without anaesthetic to a background accompaniment
offrantic sitar-playing, you will have some idea ofwhat popular Turkish music is like,

l wandered around for a couple of hours, impressed by the tumult, amazed that in one

place there could be so much activity. l walked past the Blue Mosque and Aya Sofia, peeling
postcard salesmen from my sleeve as l went, and tried to go to Topkapi, but it was closed. I
headed instead for what 1 thought was the national archaeological museum, but I somehow
missed it and found myself presently at the entrance to a large, inviting and miraculously
tranquil park, the Giilhane. it was full of cool shade and happy families. There was a free zoo,
evidently much loved by children, and somewhere a cafe playing Turkish torture music, but
softly enough to be tolerable.

At the bottom of a gently sloping central avenue, the park ended in a sudden and stunning
view of the Bosphorus, glittery and blue. l took a seat at an open-air taverna, ordered a coke
and gazed across the water to the white houses gleaming on the brown hillside of Uskiidartwo
miles across the strait, Distant cars glinted in the hot sunshine and ferries plied doggedly back
and forth across the Bosphorus and on out to the distant Princes’ islands, adrift in a bluish
haze. it was beautiful and a perfect place to stop.

Sourci horn li/wrrw l lwr Nor There. T'r.'i/rirlsfiirr1i*)ii by Bill Bryson4 nescrinliue writing

Passage: (c) Train to Lahore

Porters cluster around us and a thin-faced ascetic old man with a Gandaiflike white beard
grabs one of my cases, hoists the other onto his head and, a little disappointed that i choose to
carry my own shoulder bag, marches off through the crowds.

Our driver nods approvingly. This old man is a great character, he says. He was carrying bags
for British officers before independence. That was 55 years ago.

There are three classes on the train, two with airucon and one without.

We’re in air—con, 2nd class and are made comfortable by an army of solicitous attendants
marshalled by a man in a white suit, green peaked hat and a crimson armband, grandiy
embroidered with the words Conductor Guards A rich cast of characters, all with titles clearly
inscribed on jackets or lapels, come through offering refreshment ofvarious kinds. My
favourite is the Iceman, a stocky, embattled figure in a frayed whitejacket, whose bulbous
eyes and droopy moustache remind me of a smallvtime crook in a French gangster movie. He
hauls a huge bucket in which is a block of ice with bottles squeezed around it. There is a tired,
emaciated Sweet Seller and various perkier, smartly turned-out young men described on their
lapel badges as either Buttlers [sic] or Waiters. Waiter No.14 brings chai, sweet milky tea, and
Buttler No. 7 collects the money.

Source: from ‘riimaulaya by Michael Palin

All ofthese extracts describe either places or people and all ofthem are written in the first
person and therefore record a personal response. Despite the differences ofthe characters of
the writers which appear in the extracts, there are several similarities between the passages.
All of them concentrate on focusing on precise details of the scene or characters they are
describing.

In extract (a) the details are particularly concerned with the descriptions ofthe ‘piercing
glitter’ ofthe articles which are on sale; extract (b) contains both detail and the writer’s
reactions to and feelings about the city he is describing; and in extract (c) the character ofthe
Iceman is conveyed in particularthrough the details of his physical description with which we
are provided.

 

Tools for descriptive writing

In orderto bring a scene alive forthe reader, it is a good idea to think about ways ofdescribing
how it appeals to the different senses such as smell and hearing. Effective descriptive writing
makes use of certain linguistic devices which help to make clear what is being described.
Among these devices are: similes, metaphors, adjectives.

Another way to ensure that your descriptions are as precise and effective as possible is to
think carefully about your choice ofverbs and the adverbs which describe them.

Examples of these devices and their effects in the printed extracts are:
- Simile: For example, a Ganda/f—like White beard (Gandalf is a wizard in The lord ofthe Rings)

Metaphor: For example, the sky was bleached white

Adjectives: For exa m pie, the blood—red dust

o

Verbs: For example, humping huge and ungainly loads

Adverbs: For exa m ple, ferries plied doggedly.4 IIescrintiue writing I

32

Exercise 2

Now re—read the three passages; from each one select two or three descriptions and explain
carefully how the examples you have chosen use language to achieve the desired effects. In
particular, you should consider the writers' vocabulary, the range and type of sentence structures
they use, their tone of voice and the figures of speech they use.

Exercise 3

Here is a rather bland account. Rewrite it, by adding some additional details and information,
using descriptive writing tools such as similes, metaphors, adjectives, carefully chosen verbs and
adverbs, to create (i) a happy atmosphere and (ii) a threatening atmosphere.

Anwar was walking beside the river. it was during the afternoon. The day had been hot but now
the sun was no longer directly overhead. Anwar had been at school for the whole day. He was
feeling tired and wanted to get home quickly. He was thinking about his dinner and seeing his
family. Ahead of him he could see some figures They were coming towards him. The sun’s rays
made it difficult to see them clearly. He could not recognise any of the figures. They came closer
to him. They Stopped in front of him and spoke to him.

Remember

Make sure that you use adjectives and similes sparingly; overuse ofthem can produce a rather
static and overloaded piece of descriptive writing.

 

Exercise 4

Write a descriptive paragraph giving a clear and precise description of the following; remember to
concentrate on describing and not writing a narrative. Try to make your description as interesting
as possible:

The family car

Aschool classroom

An old person riding a bicycle

The view from your bedroom window early in the morning

A busy city street.4 nosorimive writing

3
Preparing for a descriptive writing task

Here is a descriptive writing task with some suggestions on how to approach it and what
could be included in it. Think about these points and then organise the notes into paragraph
topics and write your own essay using them.

Notes

Describe a busy local market

Do I take a narrative approach or should ljust focus on giving impressions?

Describe some ofthe stalls and the people who run them.

Describe some ofthe customers.

What time ofday shall I choose?

What about the weather?

The location ofthe market.

The senses: sounds, sights, smells (taste and touch?).

Do I describe the market in a positive or negative way?

What is my attitude to the vendors — are they to be trusted?

What tone of voice do i use? Should I be humorous or should ljust give a straight-forward
account?

i must remember the reader. He or she won’t be familiar with the market so I must make
sure that my details are clear.

Finally, here is a selection of descriptive essay titles similar to those that you might
be given in an examination. Choose one and write between 350 and 500 words.

1

Describe somewhere you go to when you want to be alone and say why this place is so
special to you.

Describe the scene at a concert hall or sports ground before the main event begins
Describe your favourite shop or market stall and some of the people who work there.
Describe a ceremony in which all yourfamily took part.

Describe a place which you know well at two different times ofthe day.