Canada is a great place for winter sports, but people also come here for the clean air and awesome scenery. The city of Vancouver is surrounded on three sides by water and on the fourth by mountains. It also has beautiful buildings.
The Caribbean is a line of tiny countries with some of the best weather and the best beaches in the world. Many cruise ships bring thousands of people to visit the islands.
Brazil has some great beaches and the city of Rio de Janeiro is famous for its carnival in the spring, when everyone dresses up and dances through the streets. Brazil is perhaps most famous for the Amazon rainforest where visitors can see enormous trees, the river Amazon and some of the rarest and most beautiful creatures on the planet.


Australia is famous for its beaches. Many people in Australia enjoy surﬁng.  Australia also has the Great Barrier Reef,  the world’s largest coral reef system. People come from all over the world to scuba dive or snorkel and to admire the fish.
China is an exciting place to visit. People come for its culture and history as well as its huge, modern cities. The Great Wall of China is over 2000 years o1d and stretches over 8850km (5500 miles). Many visitors come to walk on the wall and admire the views from it.

The centre of Australia is a huge desert called the Outback. It is very dry and ﬂat with red earth. In the middle of the outback there is a town called Alice Springs. Many tourists visit Alice Springs because they want to see the mountain-sized rock nearby. Uluru and Ayers Rack. Uluru is the traditional Aboriginal name for it. Ayers Rock is the English name given to it in the 19th century.



attract many holidaymakers come from beaches countryside safaris vistors wild flat topped background harbour 
land contrasts plenty north south modern ancient farmers land centuries 
little scenery northern castles monuments decimal system 
general subjects philosphy religion social sciences language science technology spine arts leisure literature history geography classifying bullet seasons  heavier inland tropical storms  outback dry flat red earth town electronic topic nearby skim scan 
laughing allowed puns past foreign sticky honeycombs flag snores spin nip snappan trap switch whisk dare carve rip rate tear twist juggle name wordspinning pressed regular irregular fabulous swept nothing flat beard feared owls hen larks wren built nests kite gleam 
