Referred to by different names in different countries — such as tavli in Greece, shan-liu in China, takhteh nard in Iran, and shesh besh in Arabic countries — the game of backgammon is an ancient one (going back over 5000 years to the Persian empire) which is still played all over the world today.  There was a revival of the game in the 19705, when the first Backgammon World Championship was held in the Bahamas. Since the 1980s, video games have gradually replaced all types of board game, especially for young people. Typically, it is the older generation which is seen playing backgammon in open-air cafes around the Mediterranean and in the Middle East (and nearly always 'men).  The game is immediately recognisable from the sound of dice being rolled against wood. The board is also distinctive, as it is divided in two with 12 triangles painted in each half of a hinged box - usually made of lacquered wood in different colours of brown — in which the pieces can be stored.  The aim of the game, which is designed for two players, is to move one’s pieces across the board according to the numbers shown on the dice. It is normally played with 30 ‘ stones ’ — 15 each, black or white - and two dice, which are thrown simultaneously. Pieces are removed once they reach ‘home’, and the winner is the person who — while at the same time managing to block the moves of their opponent — gets all their pieces home first.  Some believe that it is purely a matter of luck; others claim that one has to be skilful. In tournaments professional competitors play very quickly, so experience, confidence and expertise are then important factors in determining who wins.

Referred to by different names in different countries - such
as tavli in Greece, shan-liu in China, takhteh nard in Iran, and
shesh besh in Arabic countries - the game of backgammon is an
ancient one (going back over 5000 years to the Persian empire)
which is still played all over the world today.
There was a revival of the game in the 19705, when the first
Backgammon World Championship was held in the Bahamas.
Since the 19803, video games have gradually replaced all types
of board game, especially for young people. Typically, it is the
older generation which is seen playing backgammon in open-air
cafes around the Mediterranean and in the Middle East (and
nearly always. 
The game is immediately recognisLble from the sound of
dice being rolled against wood. The board is also distinctive,
as it is divided in two with 12 triangles painted in each half of
a hinged box - usually made of lacquered wood in different
colours of brown - in which the pieces can be stored.
The aim of the game, which is designed for two players, is
to move one’s pieces across the board according to the numbers
shown on the dice. It is normally played with 30 ‘ stones ’ - 15 each,
black or white - and two dice, which are thrown simultaneously.
person who - while at the same time managing to block the moves
of their opponent - gets all their pieces home first.
Some believe that it is purely a matter of luck; others
claim that one has to be skilful. In tournaments professional
competitors play very quickly, so experience, confidence and
expertise are then important factors in determining who wins.
Last week young Buddhist nuns gave hugely since classes in kung fu have been offered 
demonstrations of their skill at a there. Each morning hundreds of devotees walk
Chinese  martial art. to thousands of pilgrims clockwise around a golden statue of Buddha.
attending the Second Annual  while on the  the nuns practise the same
lighting which was made farm 
The has revealed the 1970 by films starring Bruce Lee. a Hong
that interest in  a nun has increased  actor and martial arts instructor.


The nunnery, belonging to an BOO-year- her prayers and studies. She says, ‘Meditation
I old sect, is on a hillside outside Kathmandu, becomes easier after disciplined exercise, and
capital of Nepal. Here the young Buddhist it’s also good for our health. ’ Another Indian
nuns are taught kung fu by a Vietnamese nun says she likes the fact that kung fu gives
master, who began teaching at the nunnery her strength and safety. “It protects us to have
two years ago. It was introduced into Amitabha this physical power,’ she says.
Drukpa by the leader of the spiritual sect, Normally nuns in the Himalayas are seen
His Holiness The Gyalwang Drukpa. Drukpa as inferior to monks and are overlooked, so
means dragon, and this sect, the main religion this amount of attention is unusual. They
of Bhutan, is widely followed across the have traditionally been treated as servants,
Himalayan countries. kitchen-workers and gardeners in the
The Gyalwang Drukpa says that he felt monasteries.
that previous spiritual leaders had not done A senior Buddhist nun,jetsunma Tenzin
enough to advance the rights of women. He Palmo, who attended the conference, says
decided that the introduction of kung fu was that she wants to introduce kung fu into her
the best thing that he could do for them. He own nunnery in the Indian state of Himachal
got the idea after seeing nuns in Vietnam Pradesh. She says that ‘it arouses a sense of
being taught kung fu. The nuns must practise self-confidence which is very important for
up to two hours every day. nuns, and it keeps young men in the area
The nunnery, built by The Gyalwang away when they know that the nuns are kung
Drukpa, is modern and well-equipped for fu experts ’. She reports that since nunneries
worship and study. The sect puts emphasis on have begun to offer better education, and
the importance of meditation and happiness. physical programmes like kung fu, the number
One of the nuns, a 16-year-old from India, of girls wanting to become nuns has grown
says that kung fu helps her to concentrate on dramatically.

It's my birthday tomorrow. Mummy is making a cake and
all the rest. because we really celebrate in our house. One
day is for my friends. that’s 3 December, and the next day
is for family friends and relatives. Mummy and l are
getting a tombola together. and thinking up questions
for the children’s quiz. This year we have birthday
cups, plates and napkins all with little red apples on 
them. They’re sweet. Mummy bought them in Pula
The cake will be shaped like a butterfly and . . . this
time I’ll be blowing out eleven candles. I'll have to
take a deep breath and blow them all out at once.

Sarajevo has launched an appeal (on TV) called
Sarajevo Helps the Children of 
 parcel we put a nice New Year‘s present for 
him to give to some child in Dubrovnik. We made 
up a package of sweets. chocolates, vitamins, a doll,
some books, pencils. notebooks - whatever we 
could manage. hoping to bring happiness to some 
innocent child who has been stopped by the war from 
going to school, playing, eating what he wants and
enjoying his childhood. It’s a nice little package. I
hope it makes whoever gets it happy. That‘s the idea.
I also wrote a New Year's card saying I hoped the war 
in Dubrovnik would end soon.

World No. 2 Rafael Nadal overcame juan crucial game at the start of the second set that
Martin del Potro of Argentina in an exciting swung the momentum.
thriller match at Seville’s Olympic Stadium on When Nadal broke service again to win the
Sunday, winning the fifth Davis Cup title for second set, it looked as though he was on his
his country. way to a comfortable victory. He walked through
The classic contest lasted 4 hours 8 minutes. the third set and went a break up at the start
Nada] was completely dominated at the start of of the fourth, but then del Potro, lifted by the
the match as del Potro raced out of the blocks Argentine fans, staged a remarkable comeback.
and won seven straight games to take a set and In an enthralling fourth set, which swung one
a break lead, but the world No. 2 snatched a way and then the other on more than a few

occasions, del Potro served to take the match took control, never looking back. He was
into a decider, only for Nada] to break back. utterly ruthless and completed the perfect
A few moments later the Spaniard found ‘golden’ breaker with a winning forehand, a
himself serving for the match, but this time shot which sealed Spain’s crown as Davis Cup
it was del Potro who broke back. The match champion for the fifth time.
headed into a tiebreak and Nadal immediately
 Working with a partner, make notes on the report of a tennis match in


