On 24th August, in the early afternoon, a cloud appeared over the Bay of Naples. The general appearance of the cloud rising from the mountain can best be expressed as being like an umbrella pine, for it rose to a great height on a kind of trunk and then split off into branches. In places it looked white, elsewhere blotched and dirty, according to the amount of soil and ashes it carried with it. Later, ashes were falling, hotter and thicker as ships drew near, followed by bits of pumice and blackened stones, charred and cracked by the flames; then suddenly the ships were in shallow water, and the shore was blocked by the debris from the mountain.

Meanwhile, on Mount Vesuvius, broad sheets of fire and leaping
flames blazed at several points, their bright glare emphasised by
the darkness of the night. The buildings were now shaking with
violent shocks, and seemed to be swaying to and fro as if they
had been torn from their foundations. Carriages began to run
in different directions though the ground was quite level, and
would not remain stationary even when wedged with stones. We
also saw the sea sucked away and apparently forced back by the
earthquake: at any rate it receded from the shore so that quantities
of sea creatures were left stranded on dry sand. On the landward
side a fearful black cloud was rent by forked and quivering bursts
of flame, and parted to reveal great tongues of fire, like flashes of
lightning magnified in size.

Soon afterwards the cloud sank down to earth and covered the
sea, spreading over the earth like a flood, as if the universe had
been plunged into eternal darkness for everrnore.

At last the darkness thinned and dispersed like smoke or cloud;
then there was daylight, but yellowish as it is during an eclipse.
Everything was changed, buried deep in ashes like snowdrifts. 

Every night, at exactly eight minutes past nine, it roars through the village. I can see it coming several miles away, its powerful headlight fingering rails and telegraph wires with a shimmer of light. Silently and slowly it seems to draw nearer; then suddenly, it is almost above me. A wild roar of steam and driving wheels, the wail of its hoarse whistle at the crossing, and then, looming black against the night sky, it smashes  past, and in the swing of drivers and connecting rods I think of a greyhound, or a racehorse thundering the final stretch. High in the cab window, a motionless figure peers ahead into the night; suddenly he is blackly silhouetted by the glare of the opened fire-door, and in the orange light I can see the fireman swing back and forth as he feeds his fire. The light burns against the flying steam and smoke above; then blackness — and now the white windows of the carriages flicker past, and through the swirl of dust and smoke I watch the two red lights sink down the track.


For the Romans it looked like their easiest battle. catapults that hurled boulders at the enemy, long
They came to invade Syracuse - and found chutes that could be projected from the city
soldiers with mirrors. walls for rocks to be rolled down, and cranes with
As their boats approached the coast of Sicily grappling hooks that could lift ships and shake the
the sun came out, a light beam leapt from the sailors into the water.
shore and their boats burst into flames. They had Archimedes is best known for running through
become victims of the first ‘death ray'. Syracuse shouting ‘Eureka’ after realising, while in
For centuries archeologists have argued over the bath, that he could work out the purity of gold
descriptions of how Archimedes, antiquity/s greatest by measuring the volume of water it displaced. For
inventor, used concentrated solar energy to destroy his fellow citizens, however, that would have been
the Roman fleet in 212 BC. trivial compared with a death ray for incinerating
Historians have said nobody then knew enough the dreaded Romans.
about optics and mirrors. This month, however, a There were later examples of the use of
study will show that some ancient civilisations, the death ray, the first being in 6th-century
including that of the Ancient Greeks, had such Constantinople; when the Byzantine capital was
advanced scientific knowledge that they may even besieged by enemy ships, dozens of men holding
have made telescopes - an invention attributed to mirrors set fire to them.
the 16th-century astronomer Galileo - and that Modern scientists have recreated such events
‘ burning mirrors ’ would have been within their under controlled conditions. In 1973 a Greek
reach. A scientist lined up 60 sailors on a quay with large
Archimedes, a Greek born around 280 BC, was mirrors, from which they reflected light onto
famed for his mathematical skills and his ability to a small boat 50 metres away. The boat was in
use them for building war machines. These included flames within three minutes.

Prometheus was a Titan, one of the old gods. His father, Iapetus,
led a revolt against Zeus, the chief of the new race of gods.
Prometheus felt sorry for newly created humans, who had to live
on the cold earth, and wanted to give fire to them. Zeus forbade
this, and guarded the entrance to Olympus, the mountain home
of the gods, so that Prometheus could not steal it. But the goddess
Athena told him of a back entrance, so Prometheus was able to
steal fire and smuggle it to humans. Zeus was very angry that
Prometheus had disobeyed him, so he ordered that Prometheus
be chained to a rock. Every day a great eagle would come to
Prometheus and eat his liver, leaving only at nightfall, when the
liver would begin to grow back once more. At daybreak, the eagle
would return to the chained Prometheus and again attack his
liver. The daily ritual would be repeated for ever.


Every animal that could fly or swim was anxious to go and collect
fire from the hollow sycamore tree on an island. The Raven, who
was very confident, was sent first. He flew high and far across the
water and alighted on the tree. While he was wondering what to
do next, the heat scorched all his feathers black, as they are to
this day. He was scared and went back without the fire.
The Screech Owl volunteered to go next and reached the place
safely While he was looking down into the hollow tree, a blast of
hot air came up and nearly burned out his eyes. He just managed
to fly home, but it was along time before he could see well, and
his eyes are red to this day.
No more of the birds would venture, and so the Racer Snake
said he would go through the water and bring back the fire. He
swam across to the island and crawled through the grass to the
tree, and entered it through a small hole at the bottom. The heat
and the smoke were too much for him too, and his body was
charred black, as it still is to this day.
The animals held another council,
because there was still no fire and the world
was cold, but birds, snakes and four-footed
animals all had some excuse for not going
because they were all afraid of the burning
sycamore, until at last the Water Spider
said she would go. But the question was,
‘How could you bring back the fire? ’
Water Spider said,  manage.’ She 
crossed over to the island and through 
the grass to the fiery tree. She put one 
small burning coal into a bowl attached
to her back with her own thread, and
returned with it, and ever since we
have had fire.

