The Himalaya Mountains, the highest range on Earth, have been referred to as the 'roof of the world‘. If that is so, there is a mystery called the Yeti in our attic. This enigma, whose existence has never been proven, takes the shape of a hairy, biped creature that resembles a giant ape.  
The Himalayas lie on the border between India, Nepal and China (Tibet). They are remote and forbidding. Large stretches around these tough valleys and peaks are uninhabited. The tallest mountain in the world, Everest, 8848 metres high, lies half in Nepal, half in man...” China. It is from Nepal, though, ‘3'“ that most attempts to climb Everest and the surrounding mountains are made. In Kathmandu, the capital of Nepal, a visitor ﬁnds himself immersed in the Yeti legend. It is a commercial money-maker for the tourist industry (there’s even a hotel named ‘The Yak and the Yeti’) as well as a legend and religion to some of the Nepalese people.
  The ﬁrst reliable report of the Yeti appeared in 1925 when a Greek photographer, N.A. Tombazi, working as a member of a British geological expedition in the Himalayas, was shown a creature moving in the distance across some lower slopes. The creature was almost 300 metres away in an area with an altitude of around 5000 metres.  
‘Unquestionably, the ﬁgure in outline was exactly like a human being, walking upright and stopping occasionally to uproot some dwarf rhododendron bushes,’ said Tombazi. ‘It showed up dark against the snow and, as far as I could make out, wore no clothes.’

The creature disappeared before Tombazi could take a photograph, and was not seen again. As the group was descending, the photographer went out of his way to study the ground where he had spotted the creature. Tombazi found footprints in the snow.  ‘They were similar in shape to those of a man. The marks of ﬁve distinct toes and the instep were perfectly clear.’  
There were 15 prints to be found. Each was about 50cm apart. Then Tombazi lost the trail in thick brush. When the locals were asked to name the beast he’d seen, they told him it was a ‘Kanchenjunga demon’. Tombazi didn’t think he’d seen a demon, but he couldn’t ﬁgure out what the creature was either. Perhaps he’d seen a wandering Buddhist or Hindu hermit. As the years went by and other Yeti stories surfaced, Tombazi began to wonder if that was what he too had seen.  
Yeti reports usually take the form of tracks found, pelts offered, shapes seen at a distance or, rarely, actual face-to-face encounters with the creatures. These never take place with researchers looking for the Yeti, but with locals who stumble into the creature during their daily lives.

  Some of the best tracks ever seen were found and photographed by British mountaineers in 1951. They found them on the south—western slopes of the Menlung Glacier, which lies between Tibet and Nepal, at an altitude of 6000 metres. The tracks seemed fresh and the mountaineers followed the trail until it disappeared in hard ice. Some scientists who viewed the photographs could not identify the tracks as belonging to any known creature. Others, though, felt it was probably the trail of a langur monkey or red bear. They pointed out that tracks in snow, melted by the sun, can change shape and grow larger, and the footprints were explained by this fact. Even so, the bear/monkey theory seems unlikely to be true, as both of these animals normally move on all four feet. These tracks were clearly those of a biped.
  
These footprints were not the ﬁrst or last discovered by climbers in the Himalayas. Even Sir Edmund Hillary and his Sherpa guide, Tenzing Norgay, on their record ascent to the top of Mount Everest in 1953, found giant footprints on their way up.
  One of the more curious reports of a close encounter with a Yeti occurred in 1938. Captain d’Auvergue, the curator of the Victoria Memorial in Kolkara, India, was travelling in the Himalayas by himself when he became snowblind. As he neared death from exposure he was rescued by a three-metre tall Yeti that nursed him back to health until d’Auvergue was able to return home by himself.
  In many other stories, though, the Yeti hasn’t been so benign. One Sherpa girl, who was tending her yaks, described being surprised by a large ape-like creature with black and brown hair. It started to drag her off, but seemed to be distracted by her screams and let her go. It then savagely attacked and killed two of her yaks. She escaped with her life and the incident was reported to the police, who found footprints.  
Several expeditions have been organised to track down the Yeti, but none has discovered anything more than footprints and questionable artefacts like scalps and hides. A theory recently suggested is that the Yeti is actually three animals: the rare Tibetan blue bear which attacks cattle; a gibbon that may live as far north as Nepal, though it’s never been spotted past the Brahmaputra River in India; a mysterious savage ape covered with black or red hair that can live at altitudes of up to 6000 metres.

Many native species have been wiped out since the 18th century, when cats arrived on the Australian continent; it has up to 20 million feral cats roaming wild. Since each domestic cat is thought to catch an average of 16 mammals, 8 birds and 8 reptiles a year according to a study at the University of Adelaide, imagine how many more are being slaughtered by wild cats'. Estimates suggest that they are eating more than 3500 native animals or birds a year. A strong feral cat can eat anything up to the size of a small koala. Australian native animals are particularly vulnerable to cat predation, as they evolved without the defences to combat these unnatural predators which arrived on British ships originally. They also have low reproduction rates. When the rufus hare wallaby was reintroduced, in a short period of time it was wiped out by feral cats and now 

only exists in captivity. Schemes to re-establish other endangered species have also been thwarted in the same way. Education of the public has caused a decline in the population of domestic cats and pet shops refuse to stock them. There is a growing feeling that people should not be allowed to keep cats near bushland areas, and that cats 
should be kept indoors and owners pay a regis-tration fee. Cat lovers do not, of course, agree with these attitudes and measures just as dog lovers argue against the need to control the dingo population. Dingoes - which also arrived by sea about 4000 years ago and are not native to Australia though they have become a national symbol pose different threats. Because of their size, a pack can kill a fully grown kangaroo, and occasionally they attack humans. There was a notorious case in 1980 of a dingo apparently stealing and killing a human baby. 

Many people wrongly regard dingoes as being similar to pet dogs and tourists often try to feed them, not realising that they are wild animals with a strong urge to kill. The government advice is to avoid areas where there are dingoes and never to find yourself alone amongst them. If this does happen, one should look as tall as possible and maintain eye contact with them. On no account should one run away or they will automatically chase and attack, considering you to be escaping prey.


Call her a canine with a dogged determination
to keep running, wherever the road may lead.

The homeless dog, known as Xiao Sa.
has been following a team of cyclists for 
days along 1833 kilometres of highway from 
Kangding. Sichuan province. to Lhasa in Tibet. 

Nobody knows where the white dog came rbi
from or how long she has been straying on 
highway 6318.

Netizens call her the “dog with 
determination' and the micro blog ‘Go Go 
Xiao Sa' recording her life has attracted more 
than 37.000 followers in two weeks.

A picture of Xiao Sa in the arms of a young 
man in front of the Potala Palace on Thursday
night drew more than 4000 comments A dog nicknamed Xiao Sa has become a web celebrity after
congratulating the small dog and “Pressing she ran more than 1800 kilometres on the Qinghai-Tibet
dreams of going to Lhasa.  

The young man is Zhang Heng. 522. a ‘I've heard about her from other friends
student in Wuhan. Hubei province. As his who rode to Lhasa on the road before I met
graduation trip. he decided to face the her.' said Wang Penghao. 24. from Jiuzhaigou.
challenge of riding to Lhasa with friends. On Sichuan province. ‘They told me to take care
the way he met a lonely dog. of her  saw her. and give her some food and
‘She was lying. tired. on the street. in water like they did.’
Yajiang. Sichuan pron’nce.’ he said. ‘So we fed ‘She followed us for three days. running
her. and then she followed our team.' behind our team but sometimes leading us.
They thought she was following for fun, but She’s very smart and knows the route. because
found she insisted on sticking around them she never got lost even when we passed
day and night. through mountains.’
A week later. Zhang and his buddies opened After following Wang. the dog lagged
a micro blog account for her. behind and met another cyclist. Wang Zi.
“We thought the dog was encouraging us. on 4 May.
and wanted others to know its stoiy,’ he said. ‘She may be the first dog who ran to Lhasa
They created the name Xiao Sa by along this route.’ said Wang Zi. who was
combining xim) meaning ‘little' with the last followed by the dog one day.
syllable of Lhasa. “l have a special feeling about her. especially
During their journey. Xiao Sa. Zhang when I found she was never lost. waited for us
and his team covered more than 1700 at milestones on the road. and ran all the time.
kilometres and climbed ten mountains higher making me believe that she never feels tired,’
than 4000 metres. Xiao Sa just ran up the he said.
mountains or along dirt roads. Wang Zi will continue to the foot of
‘Many people stopped cycling in some Qomolangma. known as Mount Everest in the
sections. then took the bus. but the dog made West, after he arrives in Lhasa.
it.’ he said. “If possible. I would like to take the dog
Zhang put the dog on the back of the bike with me, taking her to see a more splendid
when the team was riding downhill. scene.’
‘The speed can reach 70 kilometres per Zhang Heng, who accompanied Xiao Sa for
hour - impossible for the dog to catch us.’ ‘20 days. called her “a buddy and a friend’.
Many other people cycling this road had
learnt Of the dog. 



Second glance at a jaguar
Skinfull of bowls, he bowls them,
The hip going in and out of joint, dropping the spine
With the urgency of his hurry
Like a cat going along under thrown stones, under cover,
Glancing sideways, running
Under his spine. A terrible, stump-legged waddle
Like a thick Aztec disemboweller,
Club-swinging, trying to grind some square
Socket between his hind legs round,
Carrying his head like a brazier of spilling embers,
And the black bit of his mouth, he takes it
Between his back teeth, he has to wear his skin out,
He swipes a lap at the water-trough as he turns,
Swivelling the ball of his heel on the polished spot
Showing his belly like a butterfly
At every stride he has to turn a comer 
In himself and correct it. His head 
15 like the worn down stump of another whole jaguar
His body is just the engine shoving it forward
Lifting the air up and shoving on under

The weight of his fangs hanging the mouth Open
Bottom jaw combing the ground. A gorged look, 
Gangster, club-tail lumped along behind gracelessly

He’s wearing himself to heavy ovals,
Muttering some mantrah, some drum-song of murder 
To keep his rage brightening, making his skin 

Intolerable, spurred by the rosettes, the cam-brands, 

I Wearing the spots off from the inside, 

I Rounding some revenge. Going like a prayer-wheel,
The head dragging forward, the body keeping up, 

I The hind legs lagging. He coils, he flourishes

The blackjack tail as if looking for a target,
Hurrying through the underworld, soundless.

Sun-warmed in this late season’s grace
under the autumn’s gentlest slcy
we walked, and froze half-through a pace.
The great black snake went reeling by.
Head-down, tongue flickering on the trail
he quested through the parting grass;
sun glazed his curves of diamond scale,
and we lost breath to watch him pass.
What track he followed, what small food
fled living from his fierce intent,
we scarcely thought; still as we stood
our eyes went with him as he went.


Cold, dark and splendid he was gone 
into the grass that thl his prey. 
We took a deeper breath of day, 
looked at each other, and went on. 


A horse With bent legs and a tw1sted mind was a sensation on the American horse-racing circuit in the 19305. He overcame an unlikely background 
and abysmal failure to electrify the nation. blistering speed and phenomenal stamina 
defeated the best horses in the country and,
in fact, shattered more than a dozen records.
Thousands of fans turned out

His owner, Charles Howard. ”a bicycle repairman turned car
distributor, teamed up with the trainer Tom Smith to ‘rebuild’
Seabiscuit, not only physically but also mentally. They gave him as
stable companions an old pony, a stray dog and a spider monkey,
and orders were given that Seabiscuit was never to be disturbed
when sleeping. He began to develop an outstanding performance
on the race track.
Previously one of the least successful jockeys ever, Reg Pollard,
who could understand the minds of disturbed horses and who
rode those which no one else would so much as go near, rode him
into the record books. He discovered that Seabiscuit was disliked
even by other horses, owing to his habit of humiliating his rivals by
slowing down to mock them as he passed by, snorting in their faces
and then putting on a burst of speed to win the race.
