Sherwood Content, Trelawny, Jamaica — Wild celebrations broke out across this small community after their most celebrated native, Usain Bolt, ﬁnished ahead of a strong ﬁeld in the 100 metres ﬁnal at the London Olympics yesterday.  ‘To the world! I am on top of the world. I am ﬂoating,’ Bolt’s aunt Lillian Bolt exclaimed in jubilation shortly after the race.  ‘From I see him move out in the heats I say yes, he is ready. And the semi-ﬁnals . . . gosh man he was there. He delivered, ’ she said.  When her ﬂesh and blood blew away the ﬁeld in a quick 9.63 seconds for an Olympic record, Lillian broke out into wild celebration, dancing to the beat of the reggae song ‘Bolt’, which was recorded after the phenomenal sprinter’s victory at the Olympics in Beijing, China, four years ago.  Bolt’s uncle Andrew Davis said he was conﬁdent that his nephew would better the ﬁeld, especially following his effortless performance in the two qualifying races leading up to the ﬁnal.  ‘I was not thinking he would have lowered his world record, but with the ease and comfort with which he did the heats and semis, I knew he would win convincingly, ’ an elated Davis said.  Meanwhile, Lillian, who watched the race from her house, was joined shortly after by cheering members of the community, mostly decked out in the black, green and gold national colours, some beating pot covers, singing and dancing.  However, the celebration was not conﬁned to Sherwood Content as a spontaneous motorcade wormed from the community into Falmouth, the parish capital, 15 kilometres away.  ‘A so the ting go, a yah so nice, ’ one cheerful supporter was heard shouting in the historic Water Square in Falmouth.

‘Lightning strike twice, ’ another jubilant supporter shouted as he mimicked Bolt’s famous to The World pose.
 In the meantime, Lillian says her nephew is without a doubt-a track and ﬁeld legend now. 

She also argued that Bolt’s ﬁrst-place  and  Yohan Blake's runner-up 
performance in the race, which followed Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce's gold, and Veronica Campbell Brown's bronze over a similar distance in the women's 100 metres on Saturday. set the tone for the nations's 50th year of independence.       
Lillian called upon the government to consider Boltvas a national treasure.

Triple Olympic champion Usain Bolt aims to ‘amaze ’ the world at London 2012 by running 9.4 seconds for the
10om and 19 seconds for the 20om jamaican Bolt, 25, is the reigning
Olympic champion and world-record
holder over both distances, with
times of 9.58 secs and 19.19 secs.
‘People are looking forward 
to me running 9.4, 19 seconds, 
anything that’s amazing,’ Bolt told 
BBC Sport. Bolt’s 9.58 secs 100 m
world record was set at the 2009 
World Championships in Berlin. 
He told BBCl programme 
100 Days To Go that more 
performances such as the ones that
saw him take three gold medals at the 
2008 Olympics in Beijing would make 
him ‘a living legend ’
They want to see my personality,
me enjoying it and doing crazy stuff, but they also want to see that time, ’ he said.
‘If I dominate the Olympics, I’ll be a living legend. A living legend walking around.
Soundsgood.
‘I’m working as hard as possible so I can go as fast as possible. ’
Usain Bolt’s Olympic 10om triumph triggers jubilation l
in Jamaica
Usain Bolt’s 100 metres Olympic victory sparked ecsratic celebrations in his
homeland, where national pride was already riding high on the eve of celebrations to
mark 50 years of Jamaica’s independence.
Unbridled joy from crowds gathered in the centre of Kingston grew louder with every
second as the powerful strides of the world’s fastest man took him to the finish line.
Bolt’s early birthday present to his country, delivered in a blistering 9.63 seconds,
was exactly what hundreds, including many who had journeyed from the sprinter’s
parish of Trelawny, had come to watch together on a big screen. Traffic in the
Jamaican capital came to a standstill as people, braving the cold and rain of tropical
storm Ernesto, sounded horns and clanged pot covers.
Others mimicked the now famous pose of the double Olympic champion or
cheered each appearance of his compatriot Yohan Blake, who many considered as
Bolt’s main rival going into the race but who finished a respectable second with a time
of 9.75 seconds.
The passion was just as great closer to the scene of Bolt’s historic feat last night at
the Jamaica House - a bit of the Caribbean island created at the North Greenwich
Arena, London, which has operated as a base for Jamaican fans.
Bolt triggered an endless blanket of noise and hysteria. The moment the gun was
fired, the crowd chanted and brayed and hooted and they didn’t stop until he was
safely home.
‘I am so happy, ’ said Rosa Nelson, 37, from Edmonton, north London, pausing to
mimic Bolt’s trademark archery stance. ‘He represents a small nation, the best of our
small nation presenting itself to the world. We have the fastest man and the fastest
woman. We are confident and we are proud and now we are even prouder. ’
Saturday’s 100 metre gold retention by Jamaican Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce was a
source of pride, but it was just the start. The desire for a country of just 2.9 million
people to be recognised as unassailable - if only on the 100 metre track - required
total victory in the men’s event.
In the Kingston crowd, Mark Green said, ‘Let me tell you this, he is the best, none
of them can touch him. We are so proud right now. Happy Jamaica 50.

Rory felt the heat rising off the road surface in front of his car. A trickle of sweat ran down his face
under his multi-coloured helmet. Thoughts of the other challengers flitted through his head as he
waited for the signal to start. He knew most of them from previous meetings. Chuck and Glen were
both competitive, although he was confident he had the edge on them with his new motor. It was the
new drivers from the country meetings that he was unsure of.

There was concentration on all the faces, spectators and drivers alike, as they waited for the
starters instructions. A crackling speaker signalled imminent action. ‘Drivers start your engines. ’

A deafening sound of revving motors filled the air. Cars sped off, weaving from side to side in an
effort to heat the tyres during the warm-up lap. Confident in his ability to beat this field, Rory charged
forward as the starters car moved off the track and the green light flashed for them to start. Rory
forgot everything as the thrill of speed and power from the V8 engine under his bonnet took over. The
track had been watered to keep the dust down. It had now turned into mud. Red dirt caked on the
wheels and flicked up onto his windscreen, blurring his vision as he sped up beside Chuck, who had
forged ahead of him. In an attempt to keep him out Rory over-corrected. A sudden bash from the rear
shunted him to the left and he was annoyed.

‘So you want to play rough, eh! I'll show you what happens when you pick on me. ’ Within seconds
he shunted one of the new boys sideways. This set up a chain reaction. Cars collided and ricocheted
off one another. Somewhere during the ensuing laps he noticed Chuck’s car wedgbackwards into the fence. With adrenaline pumping, the race ended in a mighty drag for the finish against the new boy,
who had more power under his bonnet than Rory had expected. Today, luck was with him; he had held
the new driver off, with Jim finishing a close third.

In the pits, Rory headed towards the new driver’s car. Offering his hand he said, ‘Not bad. You put
up quite a challenge. Rory Carter is the name.’ Accepting the outstretched hand but not meeting
Rory's gaze, the driver nodded. ’Yeah, if she’d been firing on all six you wouldn’t have stood a chance.
I’m Lee Grange.’ ’Come on, don't blame your motor. You were flat out,’ Rory scoffed.

Lee squared his shoulders, and then lifted the bonnet. "That’s what you think. Take a look under
here.’

You’re right, the lead’s off. What have you got in that thing?’

If I told you, I might not get my own back next time.’

Yeah, yeah.’ Rory glanced over the bodywork. ‘You don’t advertise any sponsors, so who does
your work?’

Lee smiled, 'You’re looking at it. That’s why I didn’t make it for the other races; I had a hassle with
the starter motor. Now, I've got work to do.’ With that Lee slid through the window into the driving
seat. The engine spurted into life and the car drove from the pits in a haze of red dust.

t * * t

True to his word, Lee made Rory eat his dust in every race at their next meeting a few weeks later.
Rory had expected to find Lee waiting to gloat and was surprised that neither he nor his car were
anywhere in the pits.

He didn’t understand the guy. Most drivers couldn’t resist the chance to brag after beating him, yet
Lee didn’t even hang around to accept his trophy.

A week later, Rory was in the wrecking yard chasing a few parts when Lee walked around one of
the wrecks.

Because you won this time don't expect to beat me every week,’ Rory laughed.

We’ll see what happens, eh?’ Lee challenged back.

What is it with you? I try to be friendly and make conversation, yet you act as though

Lee pulled his hood further forward. 'I grew up on a farm, helping Dad on anything with an
engine. I guess I’m sort of a loner and my stubbornness stems from that.’

T hat explains the mechanical skill, but where does the racing come into it?’

From watching my brother race around the paddocks, I suppose. He never let me have a go in case
Mum caught us.’

Why could your brother do it and not you?’

‘I suppose it was because I was the youngest, and you know what mothers are like. So let's drop
it. oK?’

Rory couldn't understand this guy; something niggled at him.

I’ll see you at the next meeting.’

Sure.’

Rory won the first two races and Lee won the next two. Each time he saw Lee he felt more
curious. It frustrated him more when Lee didn’t show for the next two meetings. Then Rory missed
the following meeting himself through work commitments. He had to deliver a car to Bunbury
and pick up an exchange one for his father’s car yard. While there, he decided to check out the
local speedway.

No, it can’t be!’ he muttered, as a blue car flashed past with 65 painted on the side. ‘Why on earth
would Lee be racing down here?’ he asked himself. He watched him jockey for position from the middle
of the pack. One by one he picked them off. Fifth, fourth, third. Suddenly the first and second cars
clashed. Lee's car was shunted sideways and clipped the fence. Fifth tried to avoid him, but instead
spun him round, lifting and spinning him end for end along the fence.

Time stood still for Rory. He saw the orange sparks fly through the night air when it clipped the
power pole. Concern for Lee moved his legs into action. Pushing people out of the way, he jumped
over the fence and ran to the battered driver’s side door. He ripped the torn webbing from its clips in
an effort to help Lee.

Rory panicked at the sight of blood where Lee’s leathers had been ripped. Fumbling, he undid his
helmet.

oK, let us in,’ came the order from a paramedic. Pushed out of the way, Rory hovered nearby as
Lee's unconscious body was placed onto the stretcher and carried into the ambulance.

Fighting back a bevy of mixed emotions, Rory rushed to follow the ambulance, the vision of long
golden hair stamped on his mind, and her perfume still lingering.

Once upon a time a tortoise and a hare had an argument about who was faster. They
decided to settle the argument with a race. They agreed on a route and started off.
The hare shot ahead and ran briskly for some time. Then seeing that he was far ahead
of the tortoise, he thought he’d relax before continuing the race. He sat under a tree
and soon fell asleep. The tortoise, plodding on, overtook him and finished the race,
emerging as the undisputed champion. The hare woke up and realised that he’d lost.
The moral: Slow and steady wins the race.


But the story doesn’t end here
The tortoise did some thinking 
this time, and realised that 
there’s no way a tortoise could 
beat a hare in a race the way it
was currently designed. So he i
challenged the bare to another race, but over a different route. The hare agreed. They 
started off. The hare took off and ran at top speed until he came to a broad river. He 
sat there wondering what to do. In the meantime the tortoise plodded up, got into 
the river, swam to the opposite bank, continued walking and finished the race. 
The moral: 
The story still hasn’t ended!
The hare and the tortoise, by this time, had become good friends and they did some 
thinking together. They decided to rerun the last race, but as a team this time. They
started off, and this time the hare carried the tortoise until the riverbank. There, the 
tortoise took over and swam across with the hare on his back. On the opposite bank,
the bare again carried the tortoise and they reached the finishing line together. They
both felt a greater sense of satisfaction than they’d felt earlier.

approaching donkey-carts in front of a cloud of fumes and dust
created by some fifty vehicles roaring in their wake. As they drew
nearer, Yaqoob revved up the engine and began to inch the car
out of the lay-by. The two donkeys were almost dwarfed by their
entourage; but there was no denying their speed. The two were
neck-and-neck, their jockeys perched on top of the tiny carts using
their whips energetically, although not cruelly.

The noise of the approaching vehicles grew: horns tooting; bells
ringing; the special rattles used just for this purpose (like maracas,
a metal container filled with dried beans). Men standing on top of
their cars and vans, hanging out of taxis and perched on lorries, all
cheered and shouted, while the vehicles jostled to get to the front
of the eenvgy.

Yaqoob chose exactly the right moment to edge out of the
road and swerve in front of the nearest car, finding the perfect
place to see the two donkeys and at the front of the vehicles. This
was Formula One without rules, or a city-centre rush hour gone
anarchic; a complete flouting of every type of traffic rule and
common sense.

Our young driver relished this unusual test of driving skills.

It was survival of the fittest, and depended upon the ability to cut
in front of a vehicle with a sharp flick of the steering wheel (no
lane discipline here); quick reflexes to spot a gap in the traffic for
a couple of seconds; nerves of steel, and an effective horn. There
were two races - the motorised spectators at the back; in front, the
two donkeys, still running close and amazingly not put off by the
uproar just behind them. Ahead of the donkeys, oncoming traffic
for it was a main road - had to dive into the ditch and wait there
until we had passed. Yaqoob loved it. We stayed near the front, his
hand permanently on the horn.

The road straightened and levelled, and everyone picked up
speed as we neared the end of the race. But just as they were
reaching the finishing line, the hospital gate, there was a near
pile-up as the leading donkey swerved, lost his footing and he
and the cart tumbled. The race was over.

And then the trouble began. I assumed the winner was the one
who completed the race but it was not seen that way by everyone.
Apart from the two jockeys and ‘officials’ (who, it turned out, were
actually monitoring the race) there were over a hundred spectators
who all had strong opinions on the outcome. Some were claiming
that the donkey had fallen because the other one had been ridden
too close to him. Voices were raised, tempers were rising, and many
were trying to insist that the race should be re-run.

Yaqoob and Iqbal were nervous of hanging around a volatile
situation. They agreed to find out for me what was happening,
ordering me to stay inside the car as they were swallowed up by
the crowd. They emerged some time later. ‘It’s still not resolved,’
said Iqbal, ‘but there’s no point hanging around. I think we should
leave.’ As we drove away, Yaqoob reflected on his driving skills.
‘I really enjoyed that,’ he said as we drove off at a more sedate
pace. ‘But I don’t even have my licence yet because I’m underage! ’
