Most excavators would confess to a feeling of awe when they break into a chamber closed and sealed many centuries ago. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand comer of the sealed doorway. Darkness and blank space, as far as an iron testing—rod could reach, showed that whatever lay beyond was empty Candle tests were applied as a precaution against possible foul gases and then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in, the others standing anxiously beside me to hear the verdict.
 At first I could see nothing, the hot air escaping from the chamber causing the candle flame to flicker, but presently, as my eyes grew accustomed to the light, details of the room within emerged slowly from the mist, strange animals, statues and gold — everywhere the glint of gold. For the moment — an eternity it must have seemed to the others standing by — I was struck dumb with amazement, and when Lord Carnarvon, unable to stand the suspense any longer, inquired anxiously: ‘Can you see anything?” it was all I could do to get out the words: ‘Yes, wonderful things.‘
  Then, widening the hole a little further, so that we could both see, we inserted an electric torch. We were simultaneously filled with the exhilaration of discovery, the fever of suspense.  Surely never before in the whole history of excavation had such an amazing sight been seen as the light of our torch revealed to us. A roomful — a whole museumful - of objects piled one upon another in seemingly endless profusion.
 
Presently it dawned upon our bewildered brains that in all this medley before us there was no coffin or trace of a mummy. The explanation gradually dawned. Between the two black sentinel statues there was another sealed doorway. What we saw was merely an anteghambe — behind there were to be other chambers, possibly a succession of them, and in one of them, in all his magnificent panoply of death, we should find the pharaoh lying.


Next morning, we removed the blocking of the doorway and we entered the tomb. Here, packed tightly together in this little chamber, were scores of objects, any of which would have filled us with excitement under ordinary circumstances and been considered ample repayment for a full season’s work. None of us was prepared for the astonishing vitality that characterised certain of the objects. All of the larger ones were inscribed with the name of Tutankhamun. While we were still excitedly calling each other from one object to another came a new discovery. Beneath the southem-most couch was a small irregular hole in the wall — yet another sealed doorway and plunderer's hole. Clearly we were not, then, to be the first.  
Clearing the objects from the antechamber was like playing a gigantic game of spillikins. It was a matter of extreme difficulty to move one object without running serious risk of damaging others. Some were in beautiful condition, others in a most precarious state. It was slow, painful work, and nerve-wracking at that, for one felt all the time a heavy weight of responsibility. Destruction of evidence is so easy and yet so hopelessly irreparable. Seven weeks it took us to clear the antechamber, and thankful we were when it was finished without any disaster.  
We were ready at last to penetrate the mystery of the sealed door, and it was with trembling hand that I struck the first blow and carefully chipped away the plaster. When I had made a hole large enough to do so, I inserted a torch. An astonishing sight its light revealed, for there, within a metre of the doorway, stretching as far as one could see and blocking the entrance to the chamber, stood what to all appearance was a solid wall of gold.  
Had the thieves penetrated the shrine and disturbed the royal burial? Here, on the eastern end, were the great folding doors, closed and bolted but not sealed, that would answer the question for us. Eagerly we withdrew the ebony bolts, the doors swinging back as if closed only yesterday, and, revealed within, yet another shrine. It had similar bolted doors, but upon them was a seal intact, bearing the name of Tutankhamun and a recumbent jackal over Egypt  nine foes. Henceforth, we knew that within the shrine we should be treading where nobody had entered since the boy-king was laid to rest nearly 3300 years before.

The mountainous character of the Greek 
island of Lesbos ensures that driving is a
leisurely process as you wind through a
seemingly endless series of hairpin bends.
It is just as well, because the car occasionally 
has some unusual hazards to negotiate. 
Coming round one corner we were suddenly .
confronted bya large, dome-shaped rock 
inching its way steadily across our path. 
We stopped to inspect and found it wasn’t 
a rock but a lmng fossfl, a creature far more 
ancient than the Mediterranean, a beast as QM? 
old as the dinosaurs themselves, which had it. 

chosen that moment to cross our path. It felt form tortoises and their close relatives, the
l like an honour. In fact when this wild tortoise turtles, have remained virtually unchanged
l started to emerge from its shell, thrusting out since thejurassic era, 200 million years ago.
a scrawny neck and pushing paddle-like limbs However, tortoises’ very slowness has been
down on the asphalt to renew its journey, we their undoing in the past half-century. They
were touched by a double sense of privilege. It are easy creatures to find and collect, and
appeared to know we intended no harm, and have featured in human diets for thousands
with that sad, ancient eloquence the skeletal of years. It is probably the release or escape of
head turned in our direction to acknowledge domestic stock that accounts for their presence
our presence. Then the rock continued on on Greek islands. Until a ban was introduced
its imperturbable course and we were left to in the 19705 they were routinely sold by French
reflect on its message. fishmongers. ln Bulgaria the last tortoise
How can you not be moved by the restaurant closed only in the 19805.
extraordinary slow-motion world of a tortoise? However, the much more serious problem.
It seems such a powerful comment on the along with habitat loss from agricultural
haste of mankind, particularly the fizzy intensification, has been collection for the
impatience of our modern lives. Everything pet trade. In the 19605 and 19705 millions of
about the animal seems to argue less speed. tortoises were taken from countries all around
Typical is its longevity. Some of the individual the Mediterranean. Most of these animals
giant tortoises found on the Galapagos islands died prematurely, largely as a consequence
may well suryive for several hundred years and of ignorance.
be the longest-lived animals on Earth.

The banyan tree
0 you shaggy-headed banyan tree standing on the bank of the pond,
have you forgotten the little child, like the birds that have
nested in your branches and left you?
Do you not remember how he sat at the window and wondered at the
tangle of your roots that plunged underground?
The women would come to fill their jars in the pond, and your
huge black shadow would wriggle on the water like sleep
struggling to wake up.
Sunlight danced on the ripples like restless tiny shuttles
weaving golden tapestry.
Two ducks swam by the weedy margin above their shadows, and the
child would sit still and think.

He longed to be the wind and blow through your rustling branches,
to be your shadow and lengthen with the day on the water, to be a
bird and perch on your top-most twig, and to float like those
ducks among the weeds and shadows. 

Friend
Do you remember
that wild stretch of land
with the lone tree guarding the point
from the sharp-tongued sea?
The fort we built out of branches
wrenched from the tree is dead wood now.
The air that was thick with the whirr of
toetoe spears succumbs at last to the grey gull’s wheel.
Oyster-studded roots
of the mangrove yield no finer feast
of silver-bellied eels, and sea-snails
cooked in a rusty can.
Allow me to mend the broken ends
of shared days:
but I wanted to say
that the tree we climbed 
that gave food and drink
to youthful dreams, is no more. as“
Pursed to the lips her fine-edged 
leaves made whistle - now stamp 
no silken tracery on the cracked 
clay floor.
Friend,
in this drear 
dreamless time I clasp if!)
your hand if only for reassurance 
that all our jewelled fantasies were
real and wore splendid rags.
Perhaps the tree 
will strike fresh roots again:
give soothing shade to a hurt and
troubled world.

I met a traveller from an antique land
Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert . . . near them, on the sand,
Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed.
And on the pedestal these words appear:
‘My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:
Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!’
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare
The lone and level sands stretch far away.


All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players
They have their exits and their entrances
And one man in his time plays many parts, 
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms;
Then, the whining schoolboy with his satchel 
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school; and then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad 
Made to his mistress’ eyebrow; then a soldier
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard
Jealous in honour, sudden, and quick in quarrel, 
Seeking the bubble ‘reputation’
Even in the cannon’s mouth; and then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances
And so he plays his part; the sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well saved - a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound; last scene of all
That ends this strange eventful history
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

