This, O Best Beloved, is another story of the High and Far-Off Times. In the very middle of those times was a Stickly-Prickly Hedgehog, and he lived on the banks of the turbid Amazon, eating shelly snails and things. And he had a friend, a Slow-Solid Tortoise, who lived on the banks of the turbid Amazon, eating green lettuces and things. And so that was all right, Best Beloved. Do you see?  But also, and at the same time, in those High and Far-Off Times, there was a Painted Jaguar, and he lived on the banks of the turbid Amazon too; and he ate everything that he could catch. When he could not catch deer or monkeys he would eat frogs and beetles; and when he could not catch frogs and beetles he went to his Mother jaguar, and she told him how to eat hedgehogs and tortoises.  She said to him ever so many times, graciously waving her tail, ‘My son, when you find a Hedgehog you must drop him into the water and then he will uncoil, and when you catch a Tortoise you must scoop him out of his shell with your paw.’ And so that was all right, Best Beloved.  One beautiful night on the banks of the turbid Amazon, Painted jaguar found Stickly-Prickly Hedgehog and Slow-and-Solid Tortoise sitting under the trunk of a fallen tree. They could not run away, and so Stickly—Prickly curled himself up into a ball, because he was a Hedgehog, and Slow-and-Solid Tortoise drew in his head and feet into his shell as far as they would go, because he was a Tortoise; and so that was all right, Best Beloved. Do you see?  New attend to me,‘ said Painted Jaguar, ‘because this is very important. My mother said that when I meet a Hedgehog 1 am to drop him into the water and then he will uncoil, and when I meet a Tortoise 1 am to scoop him out of his shell with my paw. Now which of you is Hedgehog and which is Tortoise? because, to save my spots, I can’t tell.’


Forming the future tense In English there are many different ways of indicating the future tense. There are three in the passage: • present tense after when ('when you find') • future auxiliary plus infinitive without to ('he will uncoil') • present tense of the verb to be plus infinitive with to ('I am to drop'). The other ways are: • going to plus verb (e.g. 'she is going to start piano lessons') • about to plus verb (e.g. 'she is about to start piano lessons') • present continuous (e.g. 'she is starting piano lessons'). Which form of the future is used depends partly on how soon the future event is likely to be, and how strong the intention is. The second and third of the options above, will and am to, are more definite in intention but less definite in time than the fourth and fifth options, going to and about to, which are normally used to show that something may happen in the near future. The use of the last option, the present continuous form, shows that something will definitely happen, and the time is often specified. 

Naming of Cats The Naming of Cats is a difficult matter, It isn't just one of your holiday games; You may think at first I'm as mad as a hatter When I tell you, a cat must have THREE DIFFERENT NAMES. First of all, there's the name that the family use daily, Such as Peter, Augustus, Alonzo or James, Such as Victor or Jonathan, George or Bill Bailey — All of them sensible everyday names. There are fancier names if you think they sound sweeter, Some for the gentlemen, some for the dames: Such as Plato, Admetus, Electra, Demeter —But all of them sensible everyday names. But I tell you, a cat needs a name that's particular, A name that's peculiar, and more dignified, Else how can he keep up his tail perpendicular, 

Or spread out his whiskers, or cherish his pride? Of names of this kind, I can give you a quorum, Such as Munkustrap, Quaxo, or Coricopat, Such as Bombalurina, or else Jellylorum —Names that never belong to more than one cat. But above and beyond there's still one name left over, And that is the name that you never will guess; The name that no human research can discover —But THE CAT HIMSELF KNOWS, and will never confess. When you notice a cat in profound meditation, The reason, I tell you, is always the same: His mind is engaged in a rapt contemplation Of the thought, of the thought, of the thought of his name: His deep and inscrutable singular Name.

There was also a Beaver, that laced on the deck, or would sit making lace in the bow and how often saved them from wreck though none of the sailors knew how. 

There was one who was famed for the number of things He forgot when he entered the ship: His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings, And the clothes he had bought for the trip. 
He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed, With his name painted clearly on each: But, since he omitted to mention the fact, They were all left behind on the beach. 
The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because He had seven coats on when he came, With three pairs of boots — but the worst of it was, He had wholly forgotten his name. 
He would answer to 'Hi!' or to any loud cry, Such as 'Fly me!' or 'Fritter my wig!' To 'What-you-may-call-urn!' or 'What-was-his-name!' But especially 'Thing-um-a-jig!'
Hey everybody, let's write a rap. First there's a rhythm you'll need to clap. Keep that rhythm and stay in time, ' cause a rap needs rhythm and a good strong rhyme. 
The rhyme keeps coming in the very same place so don't fall behind and try not to race. The rhythm keeps the rap on a regular beat and the rhyme helps to wrap your rap up neat. 
`But what'll we write?' I hear you shout. There ain't no rules for what a rap's about. You can rap about a robber, you can rap about a king, You can rap about a chewed up piece of string .. . (well, you can rap about almost ... anything!) 
You can rap about the ceiling, you can rap about the floor, you can rap about the window, write a rap on the door. You can rap about things that are mean or pleasant, you can rap about wrapping up a Christmas present. 
You can rap about a mystery hidden in a box, you can rap about a pair of smelly old socks. You can rap about something that's over and gone, you can rap about something going on and on and on and on 

But when you think there just ain't nothing left to say .. . you can wrap it all up and put it away. It's a rap. It's a rap. It's a rap rap rap rap RAP! 

They told me you had been to her, And mentioned me to him: She gave me a good character, But said I could not swim. 
He sent them word I had not gone (We know it to be true): If she should push the matter on, What would become of you? 
I gave her one, they gave him two, You gave us three or more; They all returned from him to you, Though they were mine before. 
If I or she should chance to be Involved in this affair, He trusts to you to set them free, Exactly as we were. 
My notion was that you had been (Before she had this fit) An obstacle that came between Him, and ourselves, and it. 
Don't. let him know she liked them best, For this must ever be A secret, kept from all the rest, Between yourself and me.' 

In mellow orchards, rich and ripe, Is found the luminous Snitterjipe. Bad boys who climb the bulging trees Feel his sharp breath about their knees; His trembling whiskers tickle so, They squeak and squeal till they let go. They hear his far-from-friendly bark; They see his eyeballs in the dark Shining and shifting in their sockets As round and big as pears in pockets. They feel his hot and wrinkly hide; They see his nostrils flaming wide, His tapering teeth, his jutting jaws, His tongue, his tail, his twenty claws. His hairy shadow in the moon, It makes them sweat, it makes them swoon; And as they climb the orchard wall, They let their pilfered pippins fall. The Snitterjipe suspends pursuit And falls upon the fallen fruit; And while they flee the monster fierce, Apples, not boys, his talons pierce. With thumping hearts they hear him munch—Six apples at a time he'll crunch. At length he falls asleep, and they On tiptoe take their homeward way. But long before the blackbirds pipe To welcome day, the Snitterjipe Has fled afar, and on the green Only his fearsome prints are seen. 


She was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off. The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she thought: still it had very long claws and a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect. 'Cheshire Puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider. 'Come, it's pleased so far,' thought Alice, and she went on. 'Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?' `That depends a good deal on where you want to get to.' said the Cat. I don't much care where said Alice. Then it doesn't matter which way you go,' 
said the Cat. so long as I get somewhere,' Alice added as an explanation_ `Oh, you're sure to do that,' said the Cat, 'if you only walk long enough.' Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question. `What sort of people live about here?' `In that direction,' the Cat said, waving its right paw round, 'lives a Hatter: and in that direction,' waving the other paw, 'lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad.'  
 
 
