I eat breakfast at 8.30 - oatmeal, bananas, mangoes, papayas and tea. And owing to the need for protein, I often have eggs as well. I’m pretty laid-back about clothes. Most of the time I wear T-shirts and casual stuff. I have a couple of expensive designer suits for black-tie functions. I don’t like wearing them, but sometimes you have to dress up.
  In Havana, I sit on my terrace while I eat breakfast, looking out at white sand. The sea is four blocks away. When I'm away, not being able to see a blue sky every day makes me miserable. It’s good to have someone to come home to. Charlotte is a writer. We lead an ordinary life - shopping, going to movies, getting my hair cut! And I love to hang out with my family.
  Ballet is like training for the Olympics eight hours a day, and when you’re performing you have to take classes. We break for an hour at 12 for lunch in the canteen. It’s not good to overeat, because after lunch you work on the repertoire and you know you're going to have to jump. Flying in the air feels amazing. When I was younger and could be up there with nothing hurting it was like ’Wow!’ The older you get, the more you need ice packs and massage, which I have at least twice a week.  

Life in Havana is hectic. I’m happy to teach at the National Ballet School when they ask me. Owing to my experiences travelling and performing, I bring a melting pot of different cultures and influences to my teaching. I know a lot of people in Cuba, but many from my group have left. Things change. Everyone wants the opportunity to make a better life and earn money. My security is due to the property I've bought and the sound investments I've made.  
I always suffer from jetlag. I travel a lot with Charlotte, but not when I’m rehearsing. Then I have to clear my head to concentrate on learning choreography. Sometimes I need to be alone. Everybody needs their own space. I work on a laptop in my messy dressing room, where I’m able to cut myself off from everything. I am writing a novel in Spanish. I have the book inside my head and I know exactly where I'm going. But in the process of writing, things happen. You discover things about the characters which set up new possibilities. When the writing goes all right, it's a very cool feeling.
  We eat a late dinner at home. Charlotte does the cooking. I can only make black beans with rice, which we eat a lot in Cuba. I throw off my shoes. It’s wonderful to pad about barefoot on the wooden floor, but dancers have such ugly feet!


This week the Simon Bolivar Youth Orchestra from Venezuela hit town in a blaze of colour, excitement and glamour —qualities not often associated  with the world of classical music. The Festival Hall on Tuesday witnessed scenes of Boli-mania not seen since the orchestra's last visit to Britain in 2007, when they set the place alight, owing to their infectious joy, exuberant antics and unbridled enthusiasm for making music. The audience gave the youngsters a standing ovation; children screamed and adults squealed with delight at the end of the concert. After an essentially sombre, if exciting, programme, we were all hoping for some colour in the encores, and boy did we get it! The hall suddenly went dark, the orchestra put on their colourful Venezuelan jackets over their black dresses or suits, and the place went wild. As the youngsters launched into the first of two encores, both flamboyant Latin American classics that form part of their repertoire, we were no longer in a damp, grey London but in a raucous Latin America of the spirit. They stood up, shimmied, danced and threw their instruments in the air, before hurling their jackets into the auditorium. They had clearly done it no end of times before, but the pleasure they took in it was palpable. The sound they make is immense and intense; owing to the 180 young faces full of concentration and pleasure, the classical music they make feels incredibly vital. The inspiration and passion of this music, being played as if their lives depended upon it, is due to love, honesty and commitment. 

The 28-year-old conductor is a powerhouse, owing to the fact that he jumps on the spot to encourage the orchestra, his hair waving wildly, every bone of his body bending to the notes. The Simon Bolivar orchestra is no freak  of nature — it is the product of a 34-year-old project run by the Venezuelan government which gives every girl and boy, however poor, the chance to have not only free music tuition but an instrument. The result is that no fewer than a quarter of a million children — three quarters of them below the poverty line — are involved in making music in hundreds of orchestras. The Simon Bolivar Youth Orchestra are ambassadors for a philosophy, a way of life. Given the widespread contempt in which classical music is held by teenagers in this country, you couldn't help feeling that attendance at one of these life-affirming events should be nothing less than compulsory.

Most four-year-olds are content with banging on a drum and would struggle to get a note out of a recorder. But child prodigy Mimi Zou has astounded her piano teacher with her progress and tomorrow night will give her first solo performance in London's Royal Albert Hall. Mimi, who has been learning the piano for only a year, is flying from her home in China to perform. She was discovered by teachers of the reception class at an international school in Tianjin. She had been taught by a local Chinese woman, and was already playing grade-five-standard pieces. Steven Griffiths, the musical director of the school, says, 'She is not nervous at all. I have never seen anything like this before. She can read music. She isn't just copying what she is shown.' Speaking on behalf of Mimi's family, who do not speak English, Mr Griffiths said: 'She practises for three hours a day, and I give her a 40-minute lesson once a week. I am feeling my way really, because I have never taught a four-year-old before. 
`Her mother sits in on the lessons so she can see what Mimi is doing, and we have a translator. She is not perfect yet and has a long way to go, but if she is handled well she has a great future.' Mimi, who took to playing the piano after watching her 11-year-old brother Andy practising, said that her favourite composers were Mozart and Bach. Andy has since given up the piano, after being so overshadowed by his little sister. A spokesman for the Royal Albert Hall said Mimi was almost certainly the youngest pianist to perform solo there. Tonight, she will take centre-stage in front of thousands of pupils and past students of the school, and will perform from memory a two-minute solo piece in the style of a Chinese national dance, by Chinese composer Lvding He. Mozart is believed to have started playing the keyboard at the age of three, and was composing by five. By the time he was 11, he had composed his first opera.

Every Body Is Doing It In Hawaii they Hula They Tango in Argentina They Reggae in Jamaica And they Rumba down in Cuba In Trinidad and Tobago They do the Calypso And in Spain the Spanish They really do Flamenco 
In the Punjab they Bhangra How they dance Kathak in India Over in Guatemala They dance the sweet Marimba Even foxes dance a lot They invented the Fox Trot In Australia it's true They dance to the Didgeridoo 
In Kenya they Benga They Highlife in Ghana They dance Ballet all over And Rai dance in Algeria They Jali in Mali In Brazil they Samba And the girls do Belly Dancing In the northern parts of Africa 
Everybody does the Disco From Baghdad to San Francisco Many folk with razzamataz Cannot help dancing to Jazz They do the Jig in Ireland And it is really true They still Morris dance in England When they can find time to

This musical tells the story of Eva (Evita) Peron (1919-52), a woman whose name evokes powerful feelings in her native Argentina. It begins with the news of Evita's death, and then turns to a much earlier scene at her father's funeral. Eva was the child (one of many) of a rural landowner and her seamstress mother. Hers was not a wealthy childhood by any means, and she was continually discriminated against because of her lowly birth. She is refused admission to her father's funeral for this reason. This scene is contrasted with her own funeral, a spectacular affair not different from that of a beloved head of state. Eva leaves her village at the age of 15 to go to Buenos Aires and begin her campaign to become a performer, actress and public figure. In 1944 she meets Juan PerOn, an ambitious young army officer, who is imprisoned when he falls foul of the government of the time, which was far from liberal. Eva possesses persuasive skills and she uses her position as a celebrity to get him released. Following their marriage, she remains a formidable supporter, her help proving crucial to his later becoming the head of state. Once Juan Peron becomes the president of Argentina, Eva expects better treatment from Argentina's high society, but they snub her without mercy. She, in response, diverts government money from society-led charities and starts the Eva Peron Foundation. As its president, she works tirelessly and continuously to better the lot of Argentina's poor. For this work, and for having risen from poor origins to glory, she is beloved by huge masses of her fellow citizens, if not by those of high rank. She also arranges for women in Argentina to get the vote. Her death from cancer at the age of 33, while at the height of her power and influence, strikes the whole world as tragic. The most celebrated song from this musical of Evita's life is 'Don't Cry For Me, Argentina'. 
 
