Cambridge InternationalAS Level Literature in English

  

Unit 2: The language of poetry

This unit will help you to appreciate and deal with some of the poetic uses of
language: ﬁrst, the ﬁgurative language that characterises many poems and
expands their imaginative range; second, the uses of language that challenge your
understanding.

The meaning of lines of poetry can sometimes be difﬁcult to unravel because the
words are new to you, they are not in the usual order, or perhaps some are missing,

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
   

making the utterance ambiguous. It’s important to remember that a poet’s style is
not seeking difﬁculty for its own sake but striving for freshness of presentation and
thought, so that when you study the poem you will be engaged by it and remember
it with pleasure as a unique utterance.

Metaphorical language

ﬁle language of poetry can be very concentrated. One of the reasons for this
intensity of expression is the use of metaphor. Literal language — the language of
ﬁxed predictable meaning — is relatively straightforward, but as soon as language
becomes ﬁgurative (ﬁlled with ﬁgures of speech) then it becomes highly suggestive
and open to imaginative interpretation. Look at the difference between My love is
eighteen years old and has black hair (literal) and My love is like a red, red rose (a

ﬁgurative comparison).

a Metaphor is a broad term which encompasses all the comparative ﬁgures of
speech (simile and personiﬁcation, for example) rather as the term ‘mammal’
includes a wide range of animals. It is based on comparison. In the hands of a
skilled poet, metaphor can extend and enrich meaning, often working at more than
one level of comparison and extending through several lines or a whole poem.

 
   

Figures of speech ‘Don’t be put off by the fact-that? ma ny’wordsfor figuresof speech?" . g 
are unusual, often deriving from ancient Greek. This shows that Using‘themis an r  i *
essential feature of language from ancient times. There are literally Scores ofthem, but

the list below gives you the most common. L  ’

Imagery refers to the images‘of any Of our senses (sight, hearing, touch; taste, smell) I
produced in the mind by descriptive language. These imagesare often beingicomp‘ared ‘
with something else, so frequently associated with specific figures of speech.

"""7Metaphor is the most important and widespread figure of speech. it is a comparisOn in,
which unlike objects are identified with each other so that someelement ofsimila‘rity -
can be found between them. Here a comparison is made by identifying one thing with
another, but without using as or like. in its identification of one‘thing with another it
goes furtherthan a simile. ' *

For example, If music be the food of love, play on (Shakespeare Twelfth Night): music to a
lover is like food to a hungry person, feeding and sustaining. '

The slings and arrows of outrageous Fortune (Shakespeare Homlet):5life»’s blows are like
missiles thrown at us, but note that Fortune is also personified here. '

Hersk/lls have blossomed since she started lessons: her skills are growing like a plant — a
bud has grown and has gradually become a beautiful flower] '

’Extended metaphor is where the identification ofsimilar qualities iselaboratedover at:
number of lines, and may run throughout a poem or paragraph of prose. ‘ ‘Unit 2: The language of poetry

 

Simile is a figure ofspeech (really a kind of metaphor), in which two things are
compared using as or like. A good simile will be clear and economical, but also
suggestive; for example, My love is like a red, red rose (Robert Burns): beautiful, with soft
skin like petals.

Personification is a form of metaphor in which the qualities of a person are transferred
to non-human things or abstract qualities, to ‘humanise’ them and make themeasierto
understand; for example, the street lamp muttered (T. S. Eliot): the environment is just as
alive as the person walking down the street. 7 I '

Hyperbole is exaggeration - an over-statement, used for effect. It isn’tused to disguise
the truth, but to emphasise. it can be an ingredient of humour Km; for example/in
hundred years should go to praise thine eyes (Andrew Marvell, praising his lover),

Litotes is an understatement used for effect, often using a doublenegative (such as not
bad); for example, Wordsworth uses notseldom to mean ‘quite often’in The Prelude.

Antithesis or contrast places contrasting ideas next to each other for effect; oftenthey ,
are in balanced phrases or clauses. This placing can also be termed juxtaposition (see
page 89). You will find many examples ofthis throughout the book.) "

Climax (from a Greek word meaning ‘ladder’) is the point of highestsignificance which
is gradually reached; for example, to strive, to seek, to find and not to yield (Alfred Lord
Tennyson). its opposite, anticlimax or bathos, suddenly undercuts the climax (and
may be humorous); for example, from a poem describing thesurvivorsofa shipwreck:
(the cutter is the ship carrying foodstuffs): they grieved forthose that perished with the
cutter/ and also for the biscuit casks and butter (Lord Byron).

Paradox is two apparently contradictory ideas placed together which make sense

when examined closely; for example, the child/s father afthe man (William Wordsworth).

Ifthe contradiction is expressed in words in close proximity, it is called an oxymoron.

in Shakespeare’s Romeo andJu/let, Romeo makes a whole speech using them (e.g. 7
Feather of lead, brightsmoke, cold fire, sick health).

Repetition is extremely common for emphasis; if introductory phrases are repeated it
is known as anaphora. The word parallelism is used for similar structures, phrase or
clauses placed together. You will find many examples ofthis throughout the book; for
example, Ten nyson’s Mariana (see page 12). I

Irony in its simplest form involves a discrepancy between what is said by a writer and
what is actually meant, or a contrast between what the reader expects and what is
actually written. More complex forms of irony are dealt with in Part 2 ofthis book. The
word sarcasm refers to speech rather than writing, though it would be appropriate for
a character speaking in a play.

Examples

1 In Wilfred Owen’s poem Exposure, the poet vividly depicts the experience of
men in the trenches in winter, waiting for something to happen. Hie pattern of
comparisons here is mostly one of personiﬁcation, making the inanimate alive,
and thereby emphasising the cruelty of the cold weather: the merciless iced east
winds that knive as; the mad gusts tugging on the wire; Dawn massing in the east
her melancholy army; the frost which will be shrivelling many hands and puckering
foreheads crisp. At one point, Owen imagines home and its ﬁre, with its crusted
dark-red jewels: here he compares the shape of the glowing coals to red jewels,
precious by Virtue of their warmth and beauty.

2 When Ted Hughes describes the strong, viciously spiked thistles in his poem
Yhistles, he compares them throughout to invading Viking warriors:Cambridge InternationalAS Level Literature in English

    
   
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
  
 

a grasped ﬁstful
Ofsplintered weapons and Icelandicfrost thrust up
From the underground stain ofa decayed Viking.

These images are visual and tactile too, creating impressions of shape, colour
and texture. The ﬁnal stanza reads:

Then they grow grey, like men.
Mown down, it is afeud. Their sons appear

Stiﬁwith weapons, ﬁghting back over the same ground.

This images the visual decay of thistles into grey-topped thistledown and the
difﬁculty any gardener or farmer would have trying to eradicate them. Like an
invading army they will return, renewed and strong like young warriors, to take
revenge for earlier efforts to destroy them. The extended metaphor successfully
images our attempts to control nature and the spirited defence put up to try to

prevent it. Sadly, what more typical image is there of the relationship between
people and nature than an extended feud, which is never over?

 

3 In Sonnet 73 by William Shakespeare, a series of related extended metaphors is
used. It is a typical Shakespearean sonnet (see Unit 3 page 18) with three sections
of four lines followed by a couplet at the end, making 14 lines in all. The speaker
of the poem is feeling his age and he relates his physical self to three extended
metaphors: the season of the year, the time of day and the progress of a ﬁre. You
will notice that the unit of comparison gradually diminishes, down to the ‘ashes’

' which are his last remains.
4

Here are some lines ﬁlled with very visual metaphors and similes from the poem
After Midnight by Amit Chaudhuri (born 1962):

Last night the medallion moon was caught oddly
between sleek glowing channels of telephone wire.

No one stirred but a Paciﬁc of lights went on burning in the vacant
porches 

Twice I sensed hands,

Behind windows, strike a match, and a swift badge of ﬂame
Open and shut like a hot mouth.

An extract from Amit ChaudhuriAfter Midnight

The medallion moon is silver, round, like a jewel printed with signiﬁcant words,
the lights are a vast sea like the Paciﬁc Ocean, and the match is the same colour

and shape as a red badge. Like a hot mouth is a personiﬁcation, as if the ﬂame
speaks and is then quiet.

ACTIVITY 2.1

Look closely at the metaphors in the poems you are studying; then
analyse some of them by writing clearly what things are being
compared and what effects these comparisons have.Unit 2: The language of poetry

 
 

Diction is used for thewritRerTs L 4 Neologisms
choice ofvocabulary. (You may
also come across the word iexis
which is a term from thefield of
Linguistics.) Not to be confused j
with diction meaning stylerofa. ,
pronunciation in speaking; ,.  *

 

One difference between most prose and poetry is that poets sometimes create
new words (or neologisms) to draw attention to the meaning they are conveying.
You need to work out what the effect of the new word is in its context. Here are
two examples:

1 T. S. Eliot uses a character called Tiresias in his poem The Waste Land (1922)
who can predict the future. He says: And! Tiresias have foresuffered all. The word
foresuffered does not exist conventionally, but because we know how fore works

page ' A “’ when added on to the beginning ofa word, we can guess that the word means

' ‘foresee and suffer’ or ‘suffer before it happens’. The tragic situation ofone who

can foresee all the events of the future is emphasised in the use of this word,

Neologism see definition on this

making the line of the poem more concentrated and requiring more thought on

ACTIVITY 2.2 the part of the reader.
2 Thomas Hardy wrote many poems when his first wife died, remembering the
Try to identify some poems love they had shared in earlier, happier days. In his poem The Voice, he imagines

hearing her voice as he is out walking by himself and wishes he could see her as
she once was, but she is ever dissolved to wan Wistlessness. This last word is one
coined by Hardy. Wist is an archaic word for ‘know’ and was old when Hardy was

in which new words have
been created for a particular

effeCt- Your teaCher Will help writing too. So Wistless means ‘unknowing’ and Wistlessness is the state of not
you here. You may need a knowing or unconsciousness. All together the word suggests someone who is

dictionary to help you ﬁnd gone, part of the past, no longer a thinking, feeling person; its sounds are soft,
the basic building_block sad and wistful, a word very similar in sound which means ‘longing’. In both

sound and meaning, therefore, the word chosen by Hardy focuses the sense of
loss when the living reflect on the absence ofthe longed-for dead.

words used by the poet.

 

Unusual syntax and omission of words
a (sometimes called ‘deviation’)

An important way in which the language of poetry can differ from the language

of prose is in its occasionally unusual syntax; word order can be altered and some

words omitted to create an interestingly different effect. In this way, the reader is

forced to become more attentive to the words and is not able to skim the surface.
The following is the ﬁrst part of an early poem by Sylvia Plath called Two Sisters

ofPersephone (1956):

 
   

Syntax is the arrangementof ;
words into sentences, so’tha’t' '

    
 
   
  

 

conventio :ofsy

Pound poem in U
p was not a com:
_ as it didn’t have a nit Two girls there are: Within the house
One sits; the other, Without.
Daylong a duet of shade and light

Plays between these.

<
FD
1
O‘
E
2?
('3
T
3—
Q)
(/1
Q)
U)
C

the action), atpprop
an utterance Whicri , .
fleeting impression rath

an action. An extract from Sylvia Plath Two Sisters ofPersephone

ACTIVITY 2.3

Try putting the four lines from Two Sisters of Persephone into syntactically
accurate prose; then list the changes you had to make. (You don’t need to
explain the metaphor about light and shade at this stage.)ACTIVITY 2.4

Discuss with a partner the
word order and syntax in

some poems you are studying.

In almost every one you will
ﬁnd deviations from the
‘normal’ word order, and you
will ﬁnd words omitted. Try
to consider the effect these
have. A good way to point
out the difference is to do as
you have done with the Plath
stanza earlier in this unit —
put the lines into sentences in
the usual prose order, adding
any words you need to make
the meaning clear. The ﬁrst
thing you will notice is how
much longer your version is,
a reminder that poetry can
often be very concentrated
compared with prose. You
will also notice that the magic
has gone!

 

|-|-|:
W.
2
CI
0-1
ml
LU
m
I.l.l
_I:
D.
E
<,
U)

Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

There are two gLrLs. One of them stts tnstde the house, and the other
one stts outside. Throughout the dag, a duet at tight and shade ptags
between them.

These are the changes that had to be made:

‘ Word order had to be reversed Ln Ltnes 1 and Z.

- Within ts an unusual wag at sougtng ‘Ln’ or ’tnstde’; changed to Lnslde.

' Without had to be expanded to make it cLearer, and these tn the Last Line
was changed to them.

' We generaLLg sag ‘Ltght and shade) not ’shade and Ltght’, so the more
common ‘Form was used.

 

This short example shows clearly that the rearrangement of some words and
the omission of others can be very effective. The rewritten version in the sample
response is prosaic and utterly unmemorable.

In the poem, Plath contrasts two ways of living, as illustrated by the two
sisters. Beginning with Two girls emphasises this from the outset. By using within
and without, the contrast is pointed. Shade and light instead of light and Shade
draws your attention to a familiar phrase and makes it fresh again. Together with
the arrangement of the lines and the use of half—rhyme (see Unit 5) an uneasy
atmosphere is created and the reader is prepared for the contrasting descriptions
which the poet will employ to present her theme, which incidentally moves beyond
the domestic into the mythical, as Plath’s poetry frequently does.

The well-known poem by W. H. Auden (1907—73) Musée des Beaux Arts begins
by saying About suﬂering they were never wrong, / The Old Masters, rather than The
old masters were never wrong about suffering. This inversion stresses the suffering
which is the poet’s main concern by placing it directly at the beginning. The poetry
of Emily Dickinson (1830—1886) is ﬁlled with inversions. For example:

A solemn thing — it was — Isaid —
A woman — white — to he — 
A hallowed thing — to drop a life.

 

Brueghel the Younger’s Massacre ofthe Innocents in the Musée des Beaux Arts, Brussels.Unit 2: The language of poetry

 

This feature is not conﬁned to poetry. In the play Death of a Salesman, Linda speaks
of her husband to her sons, saying: Attention, attention must be ﬁnally paid to such
a person. The word attention is emphasised by its position and by its repetition
(rather than the more usual You should pay attention to a person like that).

ACTIVITY 2.5

Here is another example: a poem by Gerard Manley Hopkins which uses
unusual syntax and omits words to create speciﬁc effects. Analyse how
Hopkins does this.

Glory be to God for dappled things —
For skies of couple-colour as a brinded cow;
For rose—moles all in stipple upon trout that swim;
Fresh-ﬁrecoal chestnut-falls; ﬁnches’ wings;
Landscape plotted and pieced — fold, fallow, and plough;
And all trades, their gear and tackle and trim.

All things counter, original, spare, strange;
Whatever is ﬁckle, freckled (who knows how?)
With swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim;
He fathers-forth whose beauty is past change:

. . 11
Pralse hlIIl.

Gerard Manley Hopkins Pied Beauty (1877)

 

Hopkins omits words and writes very concentratedly in this poem praising
God’s creation. One characteristic method he uses is to create double«
barrelled words such as couple-colour, rose—moles, fresh-firecoal and fathers—
forth, each of which would require many more words to paraphrase their
meaning in prose. The four words fresh-firecoal chestnut-falls delightfully sum
up the beauties of autumn when chestnuts fall, and fires are made to warm us
and to roast the chestnuts. Fathers-forth suggests a loving and enabling parent
who cares deeply but is not possessive. Hopkins also uses lists of words, whose
meaning and sound work together to image the great variety of multicoloured
and multi-charactered things and people in the world: counter, original, spare,
strange  swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim. He does not need to spell out
with unnecessary extra words what he is referring to. The images of the senses
(sight, sound, touch, taste, smell and movement are all implied here), together
with the sounds of the words, combine to create a picture of a great creation
iridescent with change, and a great creator whose beauty, in contrast, depends
upon his unchanging nature. Hopkins’s poetry is rich with similar examples.

Lu
m
2
O
D.
U)
l.l.l
D:
Lu
.1
Q.
E
<
U)

 

/Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

0W Repetition and parallelism

Parallelism see deﬁnition on Poetic method often includes exact repetition of words and phrases, or whole

thls page lines, in order to intensify effects. Parallelism is repetition which may have some
subtle differences. The ﬁrst example for you to consider is from Tennyson’s poem
Mariana. Here are the ﬁrst two stanzas:

ACTIVITY 2.6
With blackest moss the ﬂower-pots

See if you can ﬁnd examples Were thickly crusted, one and all:

of exact repetition in the The rusted nails fell from the knots

two stanzas from Mariana. That held the pear to the gable—wall.
Then look to see if you can The broken sheds look’d sad and strange:
ﬁnd parallelism) where Unlifted was the clinking latch;

the repeated phrase or Weeded and worn the ancient thatch

Upon the lonely moated grange.
She only said, ‘My life is dreary,
He cometh not,’ she said;
She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary,
I would that I were dead!’ if :7

construction has a slight
variation. Don’t include the
rhyme at this stage, though
it is, of course, a kind of
parallelism.

Her tears fell with the dews at even; f
Her tears fell ere the dews were dried; :
She could not look on the sweet heaven,
ﬂ Either at morn or eventide.
After the ﬂitting of the bats,
When thickest dark did trance the sky,
She drew her casement—curtain by,
And glanced athwart the glooming ﬂats.
She only said, ‘The night is dreary,
He cometh not,’ she said;

She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary,
I would that I were dead!’

An extract from Alfred Lord Tennyson Mariana (1830)

The most obvious repetition is in the ﬁnal four lines of each stanza
where most of the words are the same (and this continues through the
poem to the ﬁnal stanza). Lines 2, 3 and 4 of the ﬁnal quatrain (four
lines) are exactly the same, but in quatrain 1 she says My life is dreary
and in quatrain 2 she says The night is dreary. This pattern is found with
The day is dreary used in other stanzas in alternation. The use of a line
or lines repeated in this way is typical of certain kinds of poem, such as
the ballad, and it is known as a refrain.

Her tears fell is repeated in lines 1 and 2 of the second stanza and
there is a mention of the dews, though this is worded slightly differently.

There are other examples of parallelism, such as nearly every object
being given a descriptive word (an adjective) to qualify it: blackest moss,

COMMENT

 

Mariana in the Moated Grange by
John Everett Millais.

 

a r r V.-,‘___, _ _ ____, , W ,7 .7, iniiqiUnit 2: The language of poetry

 

rusted nails, broken sheds, clinking latch, ancient thatch, lonely moated
grange, sweet heaven, thickest dark, glooming ﬂats.

There is a relentless pattern here, which is very appropriate for the
repetitive, doomed existence of Mariana, waiting for the man who
never comes. Her environment is dark and gloomy, and only the heaven
(which she cannot face) is sweet. By the ﬁnal stanza of the whole poem,
the refrain’s changes reveal a climax of desperation:

Then, said she, ‘I am very dreary,
He will not come,’ she said;

She wept, ‘I am aweary, aweary,
O God, that I were dead!’

We shall now look at an example of a shorter poem by W. B. Yeats that depends
equally upon these features. The whole poem is given below in Activity 2.7.

ACTIVITY 2.7

Identify the repetition and parallelism in this poem by W. B. Yeats: An
Irish Airman Foresees His Death, written about Yeats’s friend Major Robert
Gregory who died in the First World War.

I know that I shall meet my fate 13
Somewhere among the clouds above;
Those that I ﬁght I do not hate,

Those that I guard I do not love;

My country is Kiltartan Cross,

My countrymen Kiltartan’s poor,

No likely end could bring them loss

Or leave them happier than before.

Nor law, nor duty bade me ﬁght,

Nor public men, nor cheering crowds,

A lonely impulse of delight

Drove to this tumult in the clouds;

I balanced all, brought all to mind,

The years to come seemed waste of breath,
A waste of breath the years behind

In balance with this life, this death.

W, B. Yeats An Irish Airman Foresees His Death (1919)

 

TIP

By paying close attention to the words in poems — their implications, their sounds
and their arrangement — you will gradually become a skilled and responsive
literary critic.Cambridge lnternationalAS Level Literature in English

  
     
 
   
   
 
 
    

You should have had no difﬁculty in ﬁnding parallel and antithetical
(contrasting) phrases and constructions here. Note also its regular
metre and rhyme. (You will ﬁnd discussion of regular rhythms and
rhymes in Units 4 and 5.)

What effect does it have that the poem is written using such
parallels and contrasts? Remember the ‘I’ of the poem is not Yeats: he
is imagining the thoughts of his friend. What sort of person is the ‘I’ of
the poem? What are his feelings about the war in which he is engaged?
Think about the word ‘balance’ which is used twice towards the end.

ACTIVITY 2.8

Discuss with a friend or in class what you think about the lines: A lonely
impulse ofdelight / Drove to this tumult in the clouds. I ﬁnd them very
memorable and moving (and they stand alone without repetition and

parallelism in other lines). Compare this insight with other war poems you
have studied.

COMMENT