Unit 18: Poetry critical essays

hit 18: Poetry critical essays

Welcome to the Advanced section of the book which is, again, in three sections:
Poetry, Prose and Drama. Each follows a pattern of critical essay work, passage

‘ e iven on . . . ,
the adV'C g questions, and Unseens 1nclud1ng comparisons.

‘riting in Unit 27 in Part
ook, and refresh your

f:y by looking again at the Your sat texts

Units in Part 1 (Units 1—6). Poetry Set texts in the second year of an advanced course tend to be a selection of

the work of individual poets, rather than anthologies. The anthology is a useful way
of introducing lots of different poetic voiCes and a wide variety of themes and styles.
Studying a selection of one poet’s work in more depth brings some advantages for
the student as the work is likely to show:

I recurring themes or concerns
I coherence of vision
I common features of style.

You are given a selection of perhaps 20 or 30 poems (or fewer if the poems are more
substantial, such as those of Keats) and you are asked in any exam to write on three
(or sometimes two or three) or even, if you wish, to ‘range more widely’.

Are there any diﬂiculties to overcome? If your test or exam is a ‘closed book’
one, where no textbooks can be referred to, then you’ve got to remember all the
poems clearly to choose ones which are appropriate for your essay title, and you
must be able to quote reasonably accurately from memory to support your ideas.

Critical essays

These are essays which pose a question or ask you to discuss a proposition or idea,

sometimes using a critical prompt for you to respond to. (You will look at poetry
passage questions in the next unit.)

TIP

Don’t limit the number of poems you study and hope you can always use your
favourites in any essay question. You will see in the ‘Troubleshooting’ advice in Unit 34
that this can be very unhelpful. A moment or two thinking carefully about your best
options for the particular question will bring clear benefits to your essay. You need to
have studied most of the poems, if not all, to be sure of havingthe best possible choice.

Detailed case study: Keats

ACTIVITY 18.1

If you are not studying Keats, use the general principles here to guide your
own poetry work. The examples given show the varied possibilities for
answering the question.

Essay title: ‘The atmosphere of Keats’s poetry is always a melancholy one.’ How
far do you agree with this view? You should use three poems in your answer.Cambridge lnternational A Level Literature in English

 

Away! away! for I will ﬂy to thee, She dwells with Beauty—Beauty that must die;
1 Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards, And Joy, Whose hand is ever at his lips
] But on the Viewless wings of Poesy, Bidding adieu; and aching Pleasure nigh,
 Though the dull brain perplexes and retards: Turning to Poison while the bee-mouth sips:
 Already with thee! tender is the night, Ay, in the very temple of Delight
« And haply the Queen—Moon is on her throne, Veiled Melancholy has her sov’reign shrine,
Cluster’d around by all her starry Fays; Though seen of none save him whose strenuous
But here there is no light, tongue
Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown Can burst joy’s grape against his palate ﬁne;
Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy His soul shalt taste the sadness of her might,
ways. And be among her cloudy trophies hung.

One stanza from Keats Ode on Melancholy (1819)
I cannot see what ﬂowers are at my feet,

Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,
But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet
Wherewith the seasonable month endows

The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;

, . And silent was the ﬂock in woolly fold:
White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine; , ,
. . , . Numb were the Beadsman s ﬁngers, while he told
Fast fading Violets cover d up in leaves;

7 . . . t ’
And mid_May,s eldest Child, His rosary,'and while hlS frosted brea h

Like plous incense from a censer old,

Seemed taking ﬂight for heaven, without a death,

Past the sweet Virgin’s picture, while his prayer he
Two stanzas from Keats Ode to a Nightingale (1819) saith.

St Agnes’ Eve——Ah, bitter chill it was!
The owl, for all his feathers, was a—cold;
The hare limped trembling through the frozen grass,

The coming musk—rose, full of dewy wine,
The murmurous haunt of ﬂies on summer eves.

One stanza from Keats The Eve ofStAgnes (1819)

 

Introduction

It cannot be denied that Keats’s poems have a strong sense of sadness
running through them. illness, death, the impermanence of happiness and,
especially, beauty: these are themes which underlie everything that Keats

explore, The Eve of StAgnes, Ode to a Nightingale and the Ode on Melancholy
itself, all illustrate the statement in the question perfectly.

Main body 1

Keats was a devotee of beauty and his poetry often delights in it:A thing
ofBeauty is ajoy forever, for example. His work is filled with images of the
senses: fruit, flowers, stars, birds singing, and he uses rich images to explore
this beauty. However, this is merely superficial. i hope to show that below
all this surface beauty is a profound sense of the tragic nature of life with a

‘ corresponding feeling of melancholy which lies under all that he wrote,

Main body2

, My first example, The Eve ofStAgnes, is a romantic poem about two lovers

3 running away together, so you would expect this to be a happy poem.
However, the beginning sets the scene in the atmosphere of a miserably cold
winter: The hare limp ’d trembling through the frozen grass and in the chapel
The sculptur’d dead, on each side, seem to freeze, and the living ache in icy
hoods and mails. The warmth inside Madeleine’s bedroom is a strong contrast,

 

 

 

\—Unit 18: Poetry critical essays

but the opening does remind the reader ofthe cold world outside it. The
framework structure of the poem stresses the impermanence of all love: at
the end they glide like phantoms; and they are gone: aye, ages long ago / These
[overs ﬂed away into the storm. The story was over long ago, and even before
the end of the story they were like ghosts — phantoms. The atmosphere of
melancholy is enhanced with the death of the old Beadsman and the ancient
deformed Angela (who in themselves remind us that youth becomes age). The
young lovers’ passion, warmth and happiness are all too brief.

Main body 3

Ode to a Nightingale is similarly focused on life’s miseries. The song of the
nightingale may be beautiful but it doesn’t stay very long: AdieulAdieu! thy
plaintive anthem fades Fled is that music. The nightingale has not known
the realities of life for human beings: the weariness, the fever and the fret/
Here, Where men sit and hear each other groan  Where youth grows pale,
and spectre—thin and dies. Even as the poet listens to the bird’s song, he is
reminded of death: [have been halfin love with easeful Death, wishing he
could cease upon the midnight with no pain. The whole poem is suffused with a
melancholy atmosphere and the beauty of the song finally leaves him: Fled is
that music, so much so that he wOnders if the vision was a kind ofdream: Dol
wake or sleep?

Main body 4

The Ode on Melancholy shares most ofthe concerns and melancholic
atmosphere of the other two poems. It begins with suicidal thoughts (a

little like the beginning ofthe Nightingale ode), the temptations to suicide
creating a sinister atmosphere of gloom: Wolf’s—bane, tight—rooted, for its
poisonous Wine; a rosary of yew—berries. However, these are rejected because
they will take away the intensity of experience: shade to shade Will come too
drowsily. He speaks of the wakeful anguish ofthe soul and suggests that the
lover should enjoy Beauty while he ca n: feast on his mistress’s beauty — feed
deep, deep upon her peerless eyes, because they won’t last: She dwells with
BeautyhBeauty that must die. Any pleasure that you feel will be brief and
fleeting: aching Pleasure nigh / turning to Poison While the bee—mouth sips.
Turning to Poison expresses very powerfully the idea that pleasure is not only
transient, but can actually become poisonous — in other words, make you very
ill or even kill you. The paradox that pleasure and suffering co-exist is central
to the poem’s language and form, creating images with a strikingly gloomy
atmosphere.

Conclusion

It is clear that the statement in the essay title is true to a very large extent.

All three poems I have chosen have powerfully melancholic atmospheres.
Perhaps the most convincing argument of all is expressed in the lines: in the
very temple of delight / Veil ’d Melancholy has her sovran shrine. At the very
heart of the temple of happiness is the shadowy figure of Melancholy: she is in
her own dedicated holy place and can be worshipped there.

 

 

J

 

131132

Much have I travelled in the realms of gold,
And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
Round many western islands have I been

Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.

0ft of one wide expanse had I been told
That deep—brewed Homer ruled as his demesne;
Yet did I never breathe its pure serene

Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:

Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
When a new planet swims into his ken;

Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
He stared at the Paciﬁc—and all his men

Looked at each other with a wild surmise—
Silent, upon a peak in Darien.

Keats On First Looking into Chapman ’5 Homer (1816)

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness,

Close bosom—friend of the maturing sun;
Conspiring with him how to load and bless

With fruit the Vines that round the thatch-eaves run;
To bend with apples the mossed cottage-trees,
And ﬁll all fruit with ripeness t0 the core;

To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells
With a sweet kernel; to set budding more,

And still more, later ﬂowers for the bees,

Until they think warm days will never cease,

For Summer has o’er—brimmed their clammy cells.

One stanza from Keats Ode to Autumn (1819)

 

Introduction

N
>.
<
V)
U)
LLI
Lu
.1
n.
2
<
U)

 

Main body 1

Main Body2

 

Although Keats felt the sadness of life: the wear/ness, the fever and the fret,
his poems are filled with the powerful beauty of the natural world and this
means that the overwhelming impression of the atmosphere of his poems is
not melancholy, but intense with sense impressions. l have chosen the odes
to Autumn and the Nightingale to illustrate this. He is also very aware of other
pleasures such as reading, so the sonnet On First Looking into Chapman’s
Homer is the first poem i intend to consider.

Keats died very young and wrote some of his best poetry when ill with
tuberculosis (which his brother died of too). He was therefore particularly
aware of the sadness which life could bring and sensitive to the way that
Beauty does not last. inevitably there is some melancholy in his work —
he even wrote an Ode on Melancholy, which is very Gothic and dramatic.
However, this is not the overwhelming mood of his poems.

The sonnet On First Looking into Chapman’s Homer is warm in its appreciation
of a particular book. Keats has read a great deal and been affected positively
by what he has read. He considers these books to be realms ofgold  with
good/y states and kingdoms, a metaphor which gives a sense of the breadth
and magnificence of what is described. Only now that he reads the ancient
poet Homer in Chapman’s translation does he realise the excitement: he
imagines himself as an astronomer finding a newplanet, or like the explorer
Cortez staring at the Pacific, with his men, with a Wild surmise — silent, upon

a peak in Darien. All the thrill of discovering something new is imaged here

in this sonnet. There is nothing ‘melancholy’ about it: the very reverse in
fact. The poem’s imagery is on a vast scale: the seas, the skies, the golden
kingdoms, all from one small book that he is looking at. The sonnet form
allows the sestet to focus on the excitement of his discovery, with the two
similes expanding his thought almost limitlessly.TIP

There is always more than

one way to approach an essay
topic. Here are some other
ways in which you could
approach this essay:

I a different essay
structure

I different poem choices

I a different argument.

 

Unit 18: Poetry critical essays

Main body 3

Another poem whose imagery is very evocative is Ode to a Nightingale, though
here the poet is in a garden listening to the bird’s song. From the very first
stanza, he speaks of his ‘happiness’ — being too happy in thine happiness, and
the atmosphere of the bird singing in the trees is positive, all of summer: In
some melodious plot / Of beechen green, and shadows numberless, / Singest of
summer in full-throated ease. From the darkening garden, he looks up to the
sky and sees the moon and stars, beautifully described as the Queen-Moon

 on her throne, surrounded by her fairies. He is in the darkness, imagining
the beauty of the flowers which surround him, their sweet scent: The coming
musk—rose, full of dewy Wine, / The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.
Again, he moves from something small — here a nightingale — to a much

wider canvas: the early summer evening, the sky; later in the poem, Ruth, a
character from the Bible. His vision transcends the bird and the garden in an
atmosphere of sensuous beauty: Half/n love with easeful Death is often quoted
to show his desire to cease upon the midnight with no pain, but obviously he
must be half in love with life as well, and it is the sensory images of life which
dominate in this poem.

Main body 4

The final poem which creates an almost unbroken atmosphere of warm
beauty and calm fulfilment is Ode to Autumn, with its harvest images of
plenty: fill all fruit with ripeness to the core, the maturing of the year into a
season of mellow fruitfulness: sunshine, fruit, flowers and all the musical
sounds of autumn. The poet imagines the spirit of the season as a woman,
sometimes in the granary doing the harvesting, or making cider, or asleep
among the poppies Drows’d with the fume ofpoppies. The diction used creates
an atmosphere of relaxed calm: sitting careless; sound asleep; steady; patient.
The reader is overwhelmed with the atmosphere of warmth, beauty and calm
in this poem.

Conclusion

it would be wrong to assume that Keats, ill as he was, thought only gloomy
thoughts of the short-lived nature of happiness and death. His poetry is filled
with the beauty of nature and the intensity of sensory pleasure, so I cannot
agree with the statement in the essay title. When I think of his poetry,

i remember the beauty, not the sadness.

 

\ J

1 Different essay structure

Although each of these essays presents a diiferent line of argument, their
structures are similar: introduction and conclusion, as you would expect, and

the main body of the essay organised in four paragraphs — the ﬁrst paragraph

to quickly acknowledge the opposite point of View to the one being argued, then
one paragraph for each of the chosen poems to illustrate the argument. Having a
brief paragraph to show you can see the other point of View always shows you are
thinking! To have a poem in each paragraph is a perfectly logical way to approach
a task like this, and it is the most popular method for students writing under exam
conditions to structure their essays on poetry. However, the essay writer could have
decided to make the topic of each paragraph an idea, and then illustrated the idea
from all three chosen poems.

 

133b Human life is full of suffering and ends with death + examples from each poem. L

c You may experience intense pleasure but there will be pain at the very heart ofit + ‘
examples from each poem.

a + b + c = the main body of the essay

for example, between small, self—contained images and expansive Wide—ranging
ones; and between the present and the past.

 

means describing one sense in terms usually used for another; for example, melodious
plot (auditory and visual), Tender/s the night (tactile and visual). ln ordinary language we
use this as well, for example a loudsh/rt (auditory and visual) org/owing comments (visual.
and auditory). - ‘IP
 Lhatyou have learned

if from these sample'essays is

r 2 thatthere is no limit to the

,; f different ideas generated'by
I  works of literature; there is

" no limit to the ways otdomg
I things creatively provrded '

that your ideas are rooted in

the text. This applies equally
, to works ofprose and drama.

  
  
   
 
  
  
  
   

ACTIVITY 18.2

 
 

ke a poetry essay title you
I have been given and try to
nk of as many ways as
ssible of answering it.

cide ﬁnally which you
uld use to represent your
iersonal view of the topic.

  

  

     

'11I'HUO

Unit 18: Poetry critical essays

3 A different argument

Both of the sample essays answer the question; they have chosen very suitable
poems; both are clearly structured; they use examples to support their arguments.
Interestingly, there is evidence in Ode to a Nightingale to support two opposing
views, so it appears in both essays.

Perhaps a more sophisticated essay would take elements from both arguments
and discuss the relative merits of each in more depth. The ﬁrst paragraph of the
main body in each essay is rather sketchy and the ideas could be given more weight.
The question does ask ‘how far?’ and this gives scope for some discrimination. A
new idea in such an essay could be that art has permanence even though individual
human lives do not, and Ode on a Grecian Urn could be cited in evidence. You

could also use critic Kenneth Muir’s comment that the cold pastoral, though perfect,
is lacking in the warmth ofreality.

ACTIVITY 18.3

Below is an essay plan on a Keats essay. I’ve given you the topic sentence for
each paragraph. Rearrange them in a logical order for writing the essay:

Essay title: What do you see as the signiﬁcance of Beauty in the poems by
Keats you have studied? You should use at least three poems in your answer.

(If you look closely you will see the three poems used in the essay.)

A Throughout the poem, he contrasts the beauty of the singing and the
misery of human life.

93

‘A thing of beauty is a joy forever / Its loveliness increases; it will never / Pass
into nothingness;’

Keats was one of the Romantic poets so beauty was very important to him.
Human passion is warm, but the beauty of the star is cold by comparison.

We should indulge our experiences of beautiful things as they will not last.

‘Beauty is truth, truth beauty’—that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.

Only art is permanent, but the action it depicts is frozen and unattainable.
H Life is ﬂeeting and our experience of natural beauty is brief but intense.

(D

A logical order for the essay could be:
C—>H—>A—>E—>D—>G—>FB

COMMENT

This is only a suggestion: you might have come up with another
structure that was perfectly valid. I chose C as a useful opening idea,
placing Keats in context. Then we have the idea of the brevity of life and
the intensity of experience, which leads into the comment A which is
obviously about Ode to a Nightingale. This discussion moves naturally
to E Where Ode to Melancholy comes in, and on to D which contrasts
the human feelings of A and E with the coldness of the star in Bright
Star, our next poem. The idea of cold in D is developed in G where the
Ode on a Grecian Urn is introduced. I’ve cheated a bit by putting the
two quotations together in F and B. B is from an early longer poem by

 

  
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
      
    
   

   
   
  
     
  

135Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

0

TIP

Do not limit your comments
to Keats’s illness and short
life. More productive would
be to consider his status as
a Romantic poet, typical of
his time, elevating emotion
and personal experience;
fascinated by nature,
medievalism and the Greek
myths.

 

Keats called Endymion, which is not usually set for advanced level wOrk) 
but it shows he was always obsessed by Beauty; and F is from the end of i
Ode on a Grecian Urn, the words of the Urn about the permanent and g
beautiful nature of Art (and incidentally words which have exercised é
critics ever since Keats wrote theml). 

ACTIVITY 18.4

Look again at Activity 18.3 and discuss the following.

 

How else could you arrange these ideas? Justify your choice.
In what ways would the plan be different if you had used diﬂerent poems?

Find examples from the poems to ﬁll out the essay structure,
concentrating on paradoxes.

Connect the paragraphs using suitable discourse markers (see Unit 27).

Portrait ofJohn Keats.

\wUnit 18: Poetry critical essays

Sample essay: Christina Rossetti

ACTIVITY 18.5

Here is another poetry essay exercise, this time on Christina Rossetti.
Essay title: In what ways, and with what eﬁeets, is religion explored in
Rossetti’s poetry? You should use three poems in your answer.

‘Oh, where are you going with your love—locks ﬂowing
On the west wind blowing along this valley track?’

‘The downhill path is easy, come with me an it please ye,
We shall escape the uphill by never turning back.’

So they two went together in glowing August weather,
The honey—breathing heather lay to their left and right;
And clear she was to doat on, her swift feet seemed to ﬂoat on
The air like soft twin pigeons too Sportive to alight.

‘Oh, what is that in heaven where grey cloud—ﬂakes are
seven,
Where blackest clouds hang riven just at the rainy skirt?’
‘Oh, that’s a meteor sent us, a message dumb, portentous,
An undeciphered solemn signal of help or hurt.’

‘Oh, what is that glides quickly where velvet ﬂowers grow
thickly,
Their scent comes rich and sickly?’—‘A scaled and
hooded worm.’
‘Oh, what’s that in the hollow, so pale I quake to follow?’
‘Oh, that’s a thin dead body which waits th’eternal
term.’

‘Turn again, O my sweetest,—turn again, false and ﬂeetest:
This beaten way thou beatest I fear is hell’s own track.’
‘Nay, too steep for hill—mounting,—nay, too late for cost—
counting:
This downhill path is easy, but there’s no turning back.’

Christina RossettiAmor Mundi (1865)

My sun has set, I dwell

In darkness as a dead man out of sight;

And none remains, not one, that I should tell
To him mine evil plight

This bitter night.

I will make fast my door

That hollow friends may trouble me no more.
‘Friend, open to Me.’ — Who is this that calls?
Nay, I am deaf as are my walls:

Cease crying, for I will not hear

Thy cry of hope or fear.

Others were dear,

Others forsook me: what art thou indeed
That I should heed

Thy lamentable need?

Hungry should feed,

Or stranger lodge thee here?

‘Friend, My Feet bleed.

Open thy door to Me and comfort Me.’

Iwill not open, trouble me no more.

Go on thy way footsore,

Iwill not rise and open unto thee.

‘Then is it nothing to thee? Open, see

Who stands to plead with thee.

Open, lest I should pass thee by, and thou
One day entreat My Face

And howl for grace,

And I be deaf as thou art now.

Open to Me.’

An extract from Christina Rossetti
Despised and Rejected (1862)

 

‘ See page 141 for Up—hi/l by Christina Rossetti.

137Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 
 

 

‘ Dialectical mean,s:usihg.af‘ ,

format afiquestiion *a‘r’fd‘ answer; .. *

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction

Main body 1

The first two poems I have chosen are Amor Mundi (Love of the World) and
Up—hill. Interestingly, these poems were placed together in a collection made
by the poet herself, since they are related in theme — one ofthem being

with a complex regular rhyme scheme (abcb) and internal rhymes in the first
and third line of each stanza (shown below in the different colours). The first
stanza illustrates the pattern followed throughout:

‘Oh, Where are you going with your love-locks flowing
On the west Wind blowing along this valley track?’

‘The downhill path is easy, come with me an’it please ye,
We shall escape the uphill by never turning back.’

can slip down the slippery slope! — there’s no turning back. The metaphor of
life as a journey is effectively used here.

Main body 2
Up-hill uses a similar dialogue form, but is a much slower paced poem withpainters and artists,
; ed in 1848. They wanted a
 to the kind of Camposition
Colour of ltalian art before
nter Raphael (hence
'a‘me). Christina Rossetti’s

r, Dante Gabriel Rossetti,
g leading light in'the'g‘roup.

 

Unit 18: Poetry critical essays

Does the road wind up—hill all the way?
Yes, to the very end.

Will the day’s journey take the whole long day?
From mom to night, my friend.

The poem is less direct and obvious than Amor Mandi, where the downhill
road to hell was easily understood. Again here, the poem uses the extended
metaphor ofa day’sjourney, which is hard-going — it takes all day, the road

is uphill, you will be travel—sore and weak by the time you get there. This is
the spiritual journey of life (presumably up to heaven) and it is not easy. The
question form, as in the previous poem, makes the main character — the
pilgrim figure — seem uncertain and doubtful. The resting place after life’s
journey is seen as the slow dark hours — not a very encouraging image. The
answers received are not particularly comforting ones, either. The inn which
one reaches at the end of the day is obvious:you cannot miss it; you won’t
have to wait — they willnot keep you standing at that door, and they have beds
for all who come, a restful but not very lively image of what happens at the end
of your life. When the questioner asks for comfort, the reply is rather austere:
Oflabouryou shall find the sum. if you’ve worked hard you will be rewarded
equally. The tone of the poem is serious, the short answering lines seeming
rather mysterious and sinister. The emphasis on darkness and rest does not
give a very vivid lively picture of heaven at all. Taken together, these poems
suggest that there is not much joy in the poet’s religious faith.

Main body 3

My final poem Despised and Rejected is also a dialogue poem, here between
the figure of the sinner who has the main part in the dialogue and the figure
ofJesus. The poem is mainly spoken in the first person by a friendless,

I embittered man who is imagined barring his door at night against everyone:

none remains, not one, that I should tell / To him mine evil plight; I will make fast
my door / That hollow friends may trouble me no more. Christ’s words are fewer
in the poem, but highly dramatic as he pleads to be allowed in: Friend, My Feet
bleed; Open to Me; See My Hands bleed that bring thee grace, / My heart doth
bleed for thee. But the main speaker remains unmoved and will not let him

in, telling Christ he wants to be left in peace: Leave me in peace, yea, trouble
me no more. in the morning, when he looks out and sees on the grass: Each
footprint marked in blood, and on my door / The mark of blood for evermore,

his denial of Christ confirms him as a murderer. He has lost his chance of
redemption. Once again, the poem is based on an extended metaphor, here
of the human mind being like a house which Christ tries to enter, based on a
biblical quotation from the Book of Revelation. Rossetti’s brother was one

of the Pre~Raphaelite Brotherhood, one of whose artists, Holman Hunt,
illustrated this verse with his picture The Light ofthe World, where Jesus

is seen trying to open an old overgrown door. Possibly Rossetti had seen

the picture, but the poem is in any case on a similar theme. Structurally,

in addition to the very dramatic dialogue form, the rhyme scheme is very
effective, interweaving rhymes through the stanzas, and using a variety of
longer and shorter lines. The interweaving rhymes link the speaker’s words
with Christ’s across the stanza breaks: What art thou indeed ...; Friend, My
Feet bleed, and this gives the effect through the rhyme linking in meaning as
well as sound, that whether the speaker wants to admit it or not, his life is

 

139Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

TIP
Different essay topics often

suggest particular methods
of structuring your essay. You
don’t always have to follow
the same pattern.

 

 

COMMENT

 

inextricably linked with Christ’s. Of the three dialogue poems l have chos

en,
this is the most emotional, the most dramatic and the most personal.

Conclusion

Rossetti is clearly a faithful believer who thinks that life is difficult and a
struggle. Critic Rhoda B. Nathan has claimed that Rossetti’s centra/motifis 
the find/surety ofChristianity’s eternal cycle, and this is a valid point. These
poems show someone who finds herfaith hard work, though there may be
reward at the end of it; but there is not muchjoy in her religious life,judging
from these poems. The use of the particular dialogue form, the extended
metaphors and the extremely skilled rhyming and rhythmical patterns all

i
i

\ enhance this theme.

A difference between this and the two related Keats essays is its
emphasis on the poet’s methods. The Keats essays discussed atmosphere
as the question demanded, and quoted evidence of imagery and diction
to support the argument. Here, the question asks for the ways things
are done in the poems — in other words, the poet’s methods, and what
effects these have. Because of the emphasis on method, dealing with the
poems one by one in the main body of the essay — paragraphs 1, 2 and

3 — is probably the best way to do it for this particular task.