Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

Unit 33: Typical essay terminology

In this unit, examples from poetry, prose and drama questions at this level are
illustrated with helpful comments.

1 Discuss ...

The word ‘discuss’ is often used for essays at this level. Discussion of a topic means
that you must consider all the important aspects of it, analysing and debating the
issues that you think are important.

Essay title: Discuss Shakespeare’s use of images of light and darkness in
Macbeth.

You will need to cover what the images are, how they are used in
speciﬁc situations and what they add to the play overall. Some
consideration of the contrast between them would be helpful too. You
should be able to quote several examples directly, and analyse them, as
well as making more general points.

COMMENT

Essay title: Discuss [the writer’s] presentation of [character/setting/
idea] and what it adds to the [novel/play] as a whole.

You would not be given the ﬁrst part of this question without the
second, because you might otherwise be tempted just to describe the
person, place or theme, without showing its importance in the whole
work. For example, a character could be used to contrast with the main
character; a setting could be used to symbolise a particular culture or
way of life; and an idea might be one of the writer’s main concerns in
that work. ‘Presentation’ means how the writer has used language, tone
and structure to represent the character, setting or idea.

COMMENT

2 How far ..., or To what extent  ?

‘How far ...’ and ‘To what extent ...’ give you the freedom to pitch your response
on an imaginary scale: it could be completely, not at all, or something in between.

Essay title: How far do you agree that Emma is self-centred?

You are free to argue as you wish: that Emma is selﬁsh; that she isn’t; or
that she partly is and partly isn’t; or that she is at ﬁrst, but becomes less
so. You will need to argue carefully to support your case from the novel,
but there is not a ‘right’ answer here. An essay arguing that Emma is
selﬁsh and controlling can gain as many marks as an essay arguing

that she has never had the chance to develop her real character, which
emerges as the novel proceeds and she learns from her mistakes.

COMMENTUnit 33: Typical essay terminology

 

3 In what ways  (or By what means ...) and How effectively  ?

‘Ways’ and ‘means’ are the methods used by the writer to communicate her/ his
ideas. If they are effective, then the reader is moved to realisation, understanding
or appreciation of the idea.

Essay title: In what ways and how eﬁectively do two poets in your
anthology write on the passage of time?

You need to look closely at the poetic methods used and decide if you
ﬁnd them effective for communicating the ideas to you.

COMMENT

4 What importance or signiﬁcance ... ?

The question is asking you to argue how far and in what ways an episode,
character or idea adds meaning to the work as a whole.

Essay title: Discuss the signiﬁcance of ideas and images of religious
faith in the poems of Christina Rossetti in your selection.

COMMENT

A selection of ideas and images must be analysed and discussed and a
judgement made as to their importance.

5 Comment closely/ Comment in detail with close reference to the text, focusing
263 7
on ...

Analyse the language of a passage or poem, looking closely at 

6‘ Concerns
( 9 .
Concerns are themes or 1deas.

7 Methods

‘Methods’ are the means used by the writer, such as imagery or symbol or

characterisation — all the aspects of style which have been covered throughout this
book.

Essay title: Comment closely on Hughes’s concerns and methods in the
following poem.

COMMENT

Don’t neglect any aspect of the themes and style of the poem.

8 Effects
‘Effects’ result from the writer’s employment of particular methods.Cambridge International AS and

A Level Literature in English

 

,—
Z
I.”
E
E
O
U

9

p.
2
Lu
2
2
O
U

10

I.
2
Lu
2
2
O
U

Essay title: Looking closely at the eﬁects of the dialogue and other
narrative methods, show how this passage helps you to understand
Maggie’s characterisation in the novel.

You need to look closely at how you respond to the way George Eliot at
times offers dialogue without authorial comment, and at other times
comments as an omniscient narrator. Perhaps there is use of reported
speech too. You will need to refer to the novel as a whole by using
judicious, wider examples.

Dramatic

"ﬂue word ‘dramatic’ is used to remind you that you are studying a play, with
action, tension and dialogue. ‘Dramatic signiﬁcance’ means importance to the
play as a whole; ‘dramatic contribution’ means contribution to the play; ‘dramatic
effects’ are, for example, action, climax, characters in conﬂict, sudden changes of
scene, surprises or denouement for the audience. Don’t be frightened by the word
‘dramatic’ — plunge into the passage and look for the excitement!

Essay title: Discuss the dramatic function of the witches in Macbeth.

You will have your own ideas about the function of the witches, for
example, as instigators of Macbeth’s downfall. Make sure that you also
give plenty of evidence of their effectiveness on the stage: refer to their
stirring the cauldron and producing the apparitions, as well as their
parallels/contrasts with Lady Macbeth and their ambiguous,
speeches.

riddling

Language, imagery, tone, atmosphere

Although imagery is part of language, it is often highlighted separately in the
question to remind you to look for ﬁgures of speech, such as metaphor. Don’t
forget images of the senses, such as sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell and
movement. If you are asked to comment on tone in a passage of drama, it suggests
that there are signiﬁcant features of tone for you to identify: someone is angry,
another is evasive, someone else is trying to calm them down. If the passage

is a poem, perhaps the poet’s tone is striking in some way: especially sad, or
aggressive, or nostalgic. Atmosphere is created by all the many effects of language

in a poem, play or novel. If you have analysed closely, you will feel the atmosphere
and will be able to refer to it.

a was... ~m..w..

Essay title: With close reference to the language and tone of this
passage, discuss how eﬁectively 

To answer this well, you will need appropriate examples from the
printed text in front of you.