Unit 4: Scansion

Unit 4: Scansion

   

ACTIVITY 4.1

Discuss with a partner
or in a group some other
examples of rhythms at
work in our lives.

Scansionlengthythinsee,   1‘
, definitions on this page; . _  v; '3

The analysis of poems into stanzas, lines and pauses is part of a process called
scansion. This includes rhythm and rhyme and their effects. Your work here will
help you to appreciate the way that word sounds affect meaning. This unit focuses
on rhythm and you will look at rhyme in Unit 5.

Rhythm

Rhythm comes from an ancient Greek word meaning ‘ﬂow’. Nothing could be
more familiar to us: all around us, natural and human—made rhythms — repeated
and regular — give movement and shape to our lives. The seasons follow each other
in a regular pattern; night and clay alternate in regular succession; inside our
bodies, our hearts and lungs work rhythmically. Clocks strike, car engines tick over
and music throbs, all switching between one state and another (tick—tock—tick—tock,

dark-light-dark—light and so on).
Syllables

We dance and sing and make music, creating our own rhythms in an obvious
sense, but our language too has its own rhythmical patterns, ﬂowing in an
undulating or wave—like arrangement of stronger and weaker elements. Individual
words have their own rhythms, depending on how many syllables they have. A
syllable is one sound and each word we utter is made up of one or more syllables.

red
know Each has one syllable.
ﬁnd

better
pencil Each has two syllables.
movement

poetry
computer Each has three syllables.

advising

In each of these words some of the syllables are stressed, or emphasised, when you say
them out loud and some are not stressed. It is the pattern created by the alternation
of the stressed and unstressed syllables which creates the rhythmical effect of words,
and, in turn, the sentences or lines of poetry that they form. (You may come across
the words ‘strong’ or ‘weak’ used instead of ‘stressed’ or ‘unstressed’.)

Marking stressed syllables

If you are analysing rhythm and want to show that a syllable is emphasised or
stressed, use the mark ' or ' on top of the syllable. If the sound is not stressed, the
accepted notation is a v or o shape. Later, when you become more experienced, you
won’t need to use these: you’ll be able to glance at a poem, speak it in your head and
hear at once what the pattern of rhythm is.

The rhythms of poetry are easiest to see when the lines have a regular pattern,
and this is your next area for study. Later in this unit, you’ll analyse some less
regular lines and what is known as syllabic verse (see page 27).

21Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

02m

Metre is the name forthe
organisation of rhythms into
regular and recurring patterns,
such as you find in poetry.

A foot is where two or three
syllables recur in a pattern to
form a metrical unit of rhythm
(the plural is feet).

A trochee is a metrical foot
consisting of a stressed syllable
followed by an unstressed one.

Metre

Metre means ‘measure’ and you already use it to measure length (centimetre)

and distance (kilometre). (In the USA it is spelt meter.) In poetry, metre is the
measurement of an arrangement of rhythms, and it has its own terminology which
is traditional and common to many languages. When you analyse the pattern

of stressed and unstressed syllables in a line of poetry, you are identifying the
characteristic metre, especially if it’s regular. This is part of the process known as
scansion, one aspect of which you are familiar with already — line division.
Another aspect ofscansion to consider is the rhyme scheme, which you will study
in Unit 5.

How to scan a regular line of poetry

Identify the syllables in each word and decide whether they are stressed or
unstressed, marking them on top with a — or v as you go. Use your common sense
about the sound of the word, then read it aloud, exaggerating the whole line slightly
to identify the beat.

Count the number of feet in the line, marking the divisions between the feet
with a vertical line. Marking syllable divisions with a line when you start is helpful
but this won’t be necessary when you become more experienced. Similarly, you will
soon be able to count the number of feet without using the line divisions, or even
marking the stresses, though this will take a little more practice.

Here are some examples for you to try. I’ve done the ﬁrst line for you as a guide
and marked the syllables (but not the feet). Copy the extract and mark the syllables
and feet.

Heard; Cardl, mou-rnful, holy:
Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
Till her blood was frozen slowly,
And her eyes were darkened Wholly 

An extract from Alfred Lord Tennyson The Lady ofSha/lot (1751)

In the stanza above, the recurring pattern (or foot) is — v, repeated four times in
each line. "lhis pattern is called a trochee (the ch pronounced like a k) or you can
call it a trochaic foot. It has a falling rhythm — try reading it out to yourself and
listening to the regular rhythms of each line and the way it dies away.

ACTIVITY 4.2

Copy the following verses. Divide the lines into syllables, marking those
which are stressed and those which are unstressed. Remember they are all
regular patterns.COMMENT

1

This foot( v — ) is
known as an iambus
or you can call it an
iambic foot. It has a
rising rhythm.

2

This is another rising
rhythm, but the
pattern here of two
unstressed syllables
followed by a stressed
one (v v —) is called an
anapaest (or anapaestic
foot).

3

The pattern here is
known as a dactyl

(- v v) and these
are dactylic feet. It _
has a falling rhythm
which seems to suit
very well the meaning
of the poem’s lines
here, reﬂecting on a
suicide: doomed and
melancholy.

Unit 4: Scansion

 

l
The Curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd Wind slowly o’er the lea,

The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.

An extract from Thomas Gray Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard (1751)

2

The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,
And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold;
And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea,
When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.

An extract from Lord Byron The Destruction ofSennacherib (1815)

3
Touch her not scornfully;
Think of her mournfully,
Gently and humanly,
Not of the stains of her,
All that remains of her
Now is pure womanly.

An extract from Thomas Hood The Bridge ofSighs (1844) 3
2

I A useful verse

More than 200 years ago, the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge wrote a little verse for

his son to teach him the basic feet which you’ve just been working out. Here it is;
I’ve marked the stresses for you.

Tro_che\e tri_ps froh loﬁg t5 sh5rt;
From long to short in solemn sort

Slow sphndée stalks; strong fobt! yet ill able

W

Spondee is an occasionalfoot
with two stressed syllables;
obviously you c_ouldh.’t have a

whole poem made up ofthem.
(Why not?)

Ever to come up With dactyl trisyllable.
Iambics march from she—rt to lohg;

With; leap arid E bo-und thgswih anapaests throng.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge Metrical Feet — a lesson for a boy (1834)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

If you count the number of feet in the extracts you’ve analysed, you’ll ﬁnd the
following: in your examples there are four feet in the Tennyson and Byron, ﬁve
feet in the Gray and two in the Hood. Here are the technical names for this
analysis:

1 foot = monometer
2 feet = dimeter

3 feet = trimeter

4 feet = tetrameter
5 feet : pentameter
6 feet = hexameter

mWWmammmm;

  

Longer lines of seven, eight and nine feet are sometimes, but rarely, found. Now
you know the correct terminology to describe the metre of a particular regular line:
dactylic tetrameter or iambic pentameter, for example.

Iambic monometer is extremely rare, but an example follows:

   

TIP

Don’t confuse blank verse
with free verse — see later in

 

the unit.
Km mwwmmmw Thus I
Passe by,
And die:

This is the ﬁrst stanza from Upon His Departure Hence by Robert Herrick. Most

lines of poetry are longer than this, though these spare, depressive lines are very

effective for the poet’s wretched mood.

The most common regular metre in English poetry is iambic pentameter,

n l which has been used by every great traditional poet in English. Those parts of

Shakespeare’s plays that are in verse are in iambic pentameter, which is known

as blank verse when it has no rhyme at the end of each line. You’ll see more

examples of Shakespeare’s language in Sections 3 and 6 of this book. A line

of iambics with six feet (in other words 12 syllables in all) is known as an
W Alexandrine. The poet Alexander Pope (see page 154 for one of his poems)

Alexandrine and blank verse famously characterised the Alexandrine’s potential to slow or speed the ﬂow of
see definition on this page. a poem in a rhyming couplet consisting of an iambic pentameter followed by an
' V ‘ Alexandrine:

A needless Alexandrine ends the song
That like a wounded snake, drags its slow length along.

‘Wmmem‘ﬁrﬁwWAumumawmnwwmaﬁ

TIP

Knowing the technical
vocabulary is helpful

and interesting, but your
knowledge must always

be directed towards
appreciation of the effects of
what you have observed. It is
the means to an end, not an
end in itself.

Alexander Pope An Essay on Criticism (1711)

In this unit, you’ve moved quickly from the rhythms of individual words to their
measurable ﬂow in regular lines of poetry. The terminology you’ve learned applies
usefully to many older poems, though you will ﬁnd little irregularities within
basically regular pieces.

Variations in the pattern

If you speak lines of poetry out loud and listen to their sound, the natural,
conversational rhythms of the words being used to express particular thoughts
are obvious. These may not ﬁt a perfectly regular pattern and you’d have to distort
the natural pronunciation and stress of the words to force them into one. If every
foot and every line in poetry were perfectly regular, or exactly like all the others, it
would be precise in a mathematical sort of way, but it would be monotonous and
inﬂexible.

WWW Wlmlmmmmamwwﬂ

ﬁlm...mmwmm
is...

mmmmuwmmmwamrmmmamnemmmmsmaUnit 4: Scansion

 

Now that you know the basic metres, you will be in a position to appreciate
variations and feel their effects. Even in lines you consider to be basically regular,
there are some small deviations from the basic pattern where the meaning or
natural pronunciation demands it.

ACTIVITY 4.3

In Unit 3, you looked at a poem by Siegfried Sassoon from the point of View
of its layout in lines and stanzas. Now look again at the ﬁrst stanza of the
poem and try scanning it. You should always consider the eifects as you work
through it.

 
  
 
 
 
 
  

TIP .
Some of the most effective

lines of poetry contain skilful
Variations which emphasise
important words. The
reader’s attention is caught
because a potentially smooth
rhythm has been disrupted.

 

Everyone suddenly burst out singing;

And I was ﬁlled with such delight

As prisoned birds must ﬁnd in freedom,

Winging Wildly across the White

Orchards and dark-green ﬁelds; on—on—and out of sight.

Siegfried Sassoon Everyone Sang (1918)

25
Line 1: The ﬁrst two feet are dactyls, followed by two trochees (four feet,

so it is a tetrameter).

COMMENT

Line 2: This is a regular iambic tetrameter.

Line 3: This is iambic, but the last foot has an extra unstressed syllable —
the ‘dom’ of ‘freedom’. (This pattern is known technically as an

amphibrach and may occur in this way at the end of a line.)

Line 4: This has two trochaic feet followed by two iambic ones.

Analyse the second stanza

of the poem by Sassoon.
You will ﬁnd it printed in
full in Unit 3. Discuss your

analYSiS With a Classmate 0r Orchards and dark green ﬁelds; arr—0n and out of sight
your teacher. trochee Lambus spondee spondee mmbus Lambus

Line 5: This is an unusually long line, with siX feet instead of four.
It also has an unusual pattern of stresses too, which throws
particular emphasis on certain words:

 

TIP

It’s important to realise that where the stresses come may be a matter of opinion,
not scientific fact; you might have disagreed with this analysis of line 5 of the
Sassoon poem. The word green could be unstressed or stressed, for example: if
unstressed, that would have been another iambic foot. If both green and fields are
emphasised, it draws attention to their similar sound and lengthens the phrase
effectively. Look at the way in which the meaning of the final line is also enhanced
by its length: on—on—and out of sight.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

The next example is a poem written in basically iambic pentameter with many
skilful and effective irregularities. These enhance the poet’s emotional state as well
as emphasising particularly important words. The poet is Sir Thomas Wyatt, who
was writing in the 15305 and 15405, and the subject is his rejection by women, one
in particular, who used to love him. You will note that the passage of centuries has
not affected certain basic human themes, though more recent feminist critics might
have something to say about his attitudes. The spelling has been modernised and
you are given the meaning of words now out of date.

ACTIVITY 4.5

Scan the following poem and see where the stressed syllables are.

They ﬂee from me, that sometime did me seek sometime 2 once
With naked foot, stalking in my chamber.
1 have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,
That now are wild, and do not remember
That sometime they put themselves in danger
To take bread at my hand; and now they range
Busin seeking with a continual change.

Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise
Twenty times better; but once, in special,

In thin array, after a pleasant guise, array = clothing
When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall, guise = masked ball
And she me caught in her armes long and small, small = slender

Therewith all sweetly did me kiss
And softly said, ‘Dear heart, how like you this?’

m»;me

It was no dream; I lay broad waking:
But all is turned, through my gentleness,
Into a strange fashion of forsaking;
And I have leave to go of her goodness,
And she also to use newfangledness. newfangledness 2
But since that I so kindly am served, liking new things
I would fain know what she hath deserved.

Sir Thomas Wyatt (1503—1542) They Flee from Me

The rhythms of this are complex and subtle. Your scansion will show some regular
lines and others where variations occur. Here are three examples, though you
probably found more than this.Unit 4: Scansion

 

1 Theyﬂeefrom me, that sometime did me seek
With nakedfoot, stalking in my chamber.

COMMENT

Line 1 is regular iambic pentameter, establishing an overall pattern
at the beginning. Line 2 begins within the pattern, with the ﬁrst two
feet iambic. But the word stalking upsets this pattern, emphasising
the strong determined movement referred to (and emphasising the
wild animal images used).

2 And she me caught in her armes long and small

At the time of writing the word armes would have two syllables, not
one as arms does today. Imagine this line made regular:

She caught me in her armes long and small.

The line as written by Wyatt has a completely different emphasis:
the phrase she me caught with its three stresses focuses powerfully
on the action and creates a pause after the word caught (the caesura)
before the delicate description of her long slender arms.

3 It was no dream; I lay broad waking:
27
The line begins regularly enough, but after the caesura pause
(dream) there are four stressed syllables: I, lay, broad, wak—(ing).
(Even if you decide that ‘I’ should be unstressed, there are still three
together.) 'lhe poet is reminding himself that he is wide awake,
not daydreaming or asleep; these experiences were real and in
sharp contrast to his present state of dejection because he has been
forsaken. The stressed syllables draw attention to this.

M Syllabic verse

You may have noticed that all the examples of basically regular poetry here were
written centuries ago. Of course there are more recent examples, but it’s certainly
true that modern and contemporary poets don’t use those traditional forms as
consistently as their predecessors. More modern poets may have written regular
poems in which the regularity is achieved only in the number of syllables per

line: this is known as syllabic verse. You might well ﬁnd it easier to scan this more
recent verse that doesn’t ﬁt the traditional metrical patterns. You count the syllables
whether they are stressed or not and see whether each line has the same number.

Look in an anthology and
see if you can ﬁnd any
poems that don’t seem to ﬁt
a traditional metrical form.
If it’s obviously a more
modern piece, try counting
the syllables. If it appears to
have no regular structure at
all, is not syllabic and has no
rhyme, then it is probably
free verse (see below).Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 4.?

Try counting the syllables in the following lines by Derek Walcott and you
will see how easy it is to scan this kind of poetry.

-mmww Days thick as leaves then, close to each other as hours

and a sunburnt smell rose up from the drizzled road i 3

The cloud passes high like a god staying his powers —
the pocked sand dries, umbrellas re—open like ﬂowers

Derek Walcott from Midsummer (XVII andXXVl) (1984)

ACTIVITY 4.8

The following poem is complete. Its title, Metaphors, is a reference to a ﬁgure
of speech with which you are familiar, and the poem is a kind of riddle. If you
count the syllables here, as well as the number of lines used, you will perhaps
be able to guess what the answer to this riddle is.

I’m a riddle in nine syllables,

An elephant, a ponderous house,

A melon strolling on two tendrils.
a 0 red fruit, ivory, ﬁne timbers!

This loaf ’s big with its yeasty rising.

Money’s new minted in this fat purse.

I’m a means, a stage, a cow in calf.

I’ve eaten a bag of green apples,
Boarded the train there’s no getting off.

Sylvia Plath Metaphors (1966)

l...
E The poet, Sylvia Plath, is writing a poem about pregnancy. The nine
g syllables and nine lines are particularly appropriate in this case,
8 suggesting in their form the length of time her physical being is affected
and combining well with some very descriptive metaphors.
Haiku

Haiku is a kind of syllabic verse that is great fun to write yourself. It was originally
a Japanese verse form consisting of 17 syllables altogether in three lines of ﬁve,
seven and ﬁve syllables. Because it’s so short it can only express one idea, feeling or
image, but this can be very effective: it is like a snapshot in words.

Provided that you can count syllables, it isn’t difﬁcult to write a haiku of your
own. A class were given a list of subjects and here are three of the results, for the
titles Memory, Food and Summer.Unit 4: Scansion

 

 

 

 

The smell of roses 5 sy ab es
Reminds me of my mother 7 sy ab es
Filled the house with love ’5 sy lab es
Bring me a coffee, 5 sy ab es
Chocolate fudge cake with cream! 7 sy ab es
(Diet starts Monday) 5 sy ab es
 Dust swirls on the road. 5 sy ables
I The sun has yellowed the ﬁelds. 7 5y ab es
Summer haze ﬂoats down. 5 sy ab es
Free verse

At ﬁrst sight, free verse has no apparent regularity in its form, but it is in fact designed
cunningly in the cadences and breath groups of the speaking voice. It is given shape
by the use of repetition, parallelism,enjambment (run-on lines) and pauses, and is as
carefully designed as regular iambic pentameters.

ACTIVITY 4.9

Identify examples of repetition, parallelism, enjambment and pauses in the 29
following poems and discuss their effect. The ﬁrst is an example from D. H.
Lawrence, who wrote many free verse poems in contemplation of animals.

Climbing through the January snow, into the Lobo canyon .
Dark grow the spruce—trees, blue is the balsam, water sounds
still unfrozen, and the trail is still evident.

Men!
Two men!
Men! The only animal in the world to fear!

They hesitate.
We hesitate.
They have a gun.
We have no gun.

Then we all advance, to meet.

Two Mexicans, strangers, emerging out of the dark and snow
and inwardness of the Lobo valley.
What are you doing here on this vanishing trail?

D. H. Lawrence Mountain Lion (1923)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

The second example of free verse is from The First Breakfast: Objects, by Dilip
Chitre (born 1938).

'Ihis morning is tasteless, colourless, odourless:
I sit alone at the big table. 1
The waiter is watching me. 
In the deadly white dish ‘
lie two fried eggs.

Two containers of salt and pepper.

A bowl of butter. A bowl of jam.

TWO oranges. A heap of toast.

Dilip Chitre The First Breakfast: Objects

 

In Mountain Lion the word men is repeated three times in one- and two—word
sentences with exclamation marks to emphasise their destructiveness. The
third stanza uses parallelism in They hesitate. / We hesitate. and They have a
gun. / We have no gun. Both parties are uncertain, but only one group has a
weapon.

Enjambments are used as part ofthe natural description at the beginning
and end of the extract. lending an emphatic quality to the words sounds and
still in the first section and snow andinwardness in the last. Additionally, the
first lines of the first and fifth stanzas do not contain a finite verb, giving a
sense that the actions of ‘climbing’ and ‘emerging’ are still continuing, also

SAMPLE RESPONSE,3
mm»

WRITING TIP

Always try to identify the
effects of layout, rhythm
and pace in the poems you
are analysing, relating them
as closely as possible to the
development of the poet’s
thoughts and observations.

l in “wruuntﬁnfwulwwmmmmw‘j

 

ii
a
g

  

Face is a word used to denote ,
he speed at which a verse

moves.

 
 

Unit 4: Scansion

helped by the enjambment. lf read aloud, the pauses between lines give a
dramatic significance to the encounter being described, and the final line of
the extract is a direct question, which also lends dramatic emphasis.

The First Breakfast: Objects has an apparently simple construction, but
there are a number of repetitions and parallel phrases. Here most of the lines
are end—stopped apart from the run-on line about the eggs. Objects are listed
without verbs — theyjust sit there on the table. The verse form makes the
simple matter of eating breakfast into something strange and menacing.

 

Pace

In some poems, the pace is regular and steady and in others there is a perceptible
speeding up or slowing down. This affects the meaning of the poem, and its
atmosphere. In the Lawrence poem above, for example, the section where the
poet and his companions meet the strangers is slowed by the short lines and brief
repetitive sentences. The Byron poem 7716 Destruction of Sennacherib (see page
23) has a swift ﬂowing pace,which drives through the poem, aptly mirroring the
movement of advancing troops.

31