Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

Unit 27: Writing a good critical essay
 Reminders

, Here are some reminders for you of how to prepare and then write your essay.

m

Refer to this part ofthe book

(Pa rt 3) WheneVe" you need 1 Research Begin the essay writing process by reading and studying your set text 01.
adVice on Writing teChniqueS texts thoroughly. Your own personal response comes from immersing yourself in
for assessment Remember to the text, and good knowledge will give you conﬁdence too. Later, you can see what

r ou s 5 [lab 5 . . . .
15::egruticd :gge ton time/v you Viz“ Other critics say about the work. You Will also have the Views of your classmates

 b e assessed and teachers to help you formulate your ideas. Later in this section, there is also
. J some advice about using critics.

3 Organise Look closely at your ideas and decide how to organise them. Some
are more important than others. Write a topic sentence for each paragraph
which sums up that stage of the argument and consider what would be the most
convincing order for them. Try different orders and see what the effect is. Try to
formulate your overall argument in answer to the essay question in one sentence.

mmwmwm»mmmsmm

ﬂu

 
  

  

TIP

If you have followed this
advice during the course,
under test or exam conditions
it will seem like second
nature. Don’t spend too long

a planning—about five minutes

  

4 Detail For each of these main ideas expressed in a topic sentence, ﬁnd examples
to support the ideas and what you want to discuss about them. You could have up
to three or four bullet points for each paragraph, which will be further thoughts
down and write, but they do i on that topic prompted by the examples you’ve chosen. You may ﬁnd that some
have a plan in their head! ' cannot be ﬁtted in logically and should be excluded. Be brave! Sometimes they are

it. J points you have revised, but they just aren’t really relevant to this topic.

5 Introduction Now start the essay. The introduction should relate closely to the
wording of the task and suggest the argument you are going to present. Try not
to present your ideas in a simple list. Look at Unit 34: Troubleshooting for some
examples of introductions that don’t work very well.

should be enough. Some
lucky students can just sit

 

0w

A topic sentence (sometimes
called ‘focus sentence’) makes ' ‘
the main point of‘the gyar‘agraph
’ rejsg’t tithe
, e idea
or‘g‘ives examples‘of _ A; topic
sentence can, appearanyWhere

in the paragraph,but,a‘STit V '
controls the ideasandexam‘ples
in the paragraph. it, isurriostbf'tén: '
found at the beginningiorlasa 3 r
summing up atsth‘eéendof the} _
paragraph. ' 'TIP

See Unit 34: Troubleshooting
for avoiding common pitfalls.

 

Unit 27: Writing a good critical essay

6 Main body Each individual paragraph should be focused on a single idea
expressed in each topic sentence, developed and supported with textual evidence
(see later in this unit for advice on this) and linked to the next paragraph with
clear signposts. You are using your detail from point 4.

7 Discourse markers or signposts Paragraphs should be linked with appropriate
words or phrases which show the direction the argument is taking.

8 Write clearly in complete sentences and try to use appropriate literary terms where
relevant Practice makes perfect, as the old saying goes. The more you write essays
and act on the advice of your teachers, the more ﬂuent your work will become.

8 Critical ideas If you have quoted the ideas of others, such as critics, they must be
placed in quotation marks and attributed properly, not just ‘many critics argue 
(see Unit 32 for more advice on this).

9 Conclusion Your conclusion should sum up your argument and round it off clearly.
You may have come to a deﬁnitive conclusion, but in our subject it could be a more
tentative one because you have explored different interpretations of a work.

10 Checking Proofread your work for technical errors. Don’t rely on a computer’s
spell check! If you are writing by hand, make sure it’s clear.

11 Read over your whole essay Does it answer the question? Does the argument
follow on clearly?

Discourse markers

These are the useful signposts between paragraphs which show the reader where
your argument is going.

If you want to show the order of things, you can say: ‘ﬁrstly’, ‘secondly’ and 251
‘thirdly’, but this does seem rather mechanical if you overuse it. (You may end up
like Dogberry in Much Ado About Nothing with his Sixth and lastly!) Ifyour ideas
are well ordered, it will be obvious. ‘Next’ is a helpful word, of course.

If you want to show that your argument is continuing, you can use: ‘in addition’,
‘also’, ‘too’, ‘another aspect’, ‘similarly’, ‘furthermore’, or ‘moreover’. Make sure that
your next point really is similar if you use ‘similarly’, otherwise it will confuse the
reader. ‘Moreover’ is a continuation word, but it has quite a strong effect ~ it’s a little
like ‘and another thing’ in a verbal argument.

If you are writing an essay about three poems, and each poem is discussed in
one paragraph, make sure that there is a link between them, or each paragraph will
seem like a mini—essay. You can use something like: ‘Another poem which shows
the poet’s concern with (theme), or use of (contrast) is  ’. You are trying to ﬁnd
links and should show this in the structure of the essay.

If you want to show that you are now introducing a different point of View in
the argument or qualifying it to some extent you will need: ‘however’; ‘on the other
hand’; ‘in spite of this’; ‘yet’, or ‘nonetheless’.

When you come to your conclusion you can say: ‘ﬁnally’, ‘in conclusion’, ‘to
sum up’, ‘lastly’. You may want to say ‘on one hand’ and ‘on the other’ here if you
feel there are different ways of judging the essay topic and the essay title suggests it.
Avoid ‘Thus we see that  ’ at the beginning of your conclusion.

Successful quotation from the text

1 The purpose of quotation is to give evidence that you know the text really
thoroughly, to support detailed points in your argument and to show that you

appreciate how the writer’s use of language and style contributes to the effect. It
is essential for the well—made essay.Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

2 You do not need to quote at length. Two lines is the absolute maximum for pOetr
a few words would be better. Try to integrate the quotation within your own y’
sentence. There are examples of this below.

3 Brief, indirect references to the text are ﬁne if you can’t remember the exac

t Words
in a closed book test.

4 Make sure that your quotations really do support the point you’re making and are
not just scraps that you remember which aren’t quite relevant.

5 You may have heard of the formula PEE — point, evidence, explain. Of course, it’s
good to have evidence to support your points, but be careful not to explain things

in a paraphrasing kind of way. I suggest you make an analytical comment rather
than giving any explanations.

Examples which illustrate effective use of textual support

1 This is from an essay on Edith Wharton’s novel The Age of Innocence. The main
character, Newland Archer, is engaged to be married to May, the conventional

‘right choice’ for him, though this does not turn out well. Look at how neatly apt
references are tucked into the writer’s sentences:

 

Newland is trapped by society and by May. Although he recognises that May

is the embedded image of the family and is ripening into a copy of her mother,
he is not put off by this at first. The blameless domesticity that May offers is a
tempting prospect at this stage, and though her na'ivety annoys him (that’s the
only target she’ll ever hit), May isjust the wife he was brought up to desire.

 

The following example is from a passage question on Harold Pinter’s play The Room:

 

(I don’t know — You don’t know exactly where he hangs out). Gradually, a sense
of fear and paranoia colours the whole scene.

 

lhis example is from an unseen poetry exercise:

 

ln Ancestral Poem by the Caribbean poet Olive Senior, the poet emphasises
herfather’s harsh and endless work rituals in the following lines: the centuries
of dirt / beneath his ﬁngernails / encased in the memories / of his race. This
hyperbole is effective in expressing her father’s unending toil in the sense
image of dirty fingernails, but it also links his efforts to the identity of his
whole race and their enslavement.

2
Although the language seems ordinary enough, the tone at first seems a little
tense. The fact that Rose never goes out makes her seems defensive, and this
is contrasted with Mr Sands who is dominant and tends to finish her sentences
3

 

4 Here is an example of successful indirect reference to the text from an essay on

Ode to a Nightingale: instead of quoting I cannot see what ﬂowers are at my feet or
in embalmed darkness guess each sweet ...’, the answer has:

 

He can’t see but he senses all the spring flowers around him, which he can

The poem is full of sense imagery but sound is the most important. Keats
imagines standing in the darkness and just listening to the nightingale singing.
smell. The effect is very evocative - the reader can imagine being there.