Unit 3: Poetic structures and themes

Unit 3: Poetic structures and themes

ACTIVITY 3.1

Take three poems that you
are studying and summarise
the structure of each one.
Can you add any categories
to the list opposite?

In this unit, you will study the ways in which poetic structures enhance themes,
and how the layout of poems differs from prose layout. You will also learn some of
the technical vocabulary for discussing the way that lines of poetry are organised.

Theme and structure

The development of a poem’s ideas will be made possible by the underpinning
structure of the poem as a whole. Where does the poem start, how does it continue
and in what way does it reach its conclusion? What relationship do the different
sections of the poem have to each other? What effect does this have on the
unfolding of the theme of the poem? Always ask these questions about structure,
about how the poem is built.

Here are some common poetic structures.

l The poet recounts an experience or tells a little anecdote in the ﬁrst few sections
of the poem, and the ﬁnal stanza or line is a philosophical reﬂection on the
signiﬁcance of the experience (e.g. many of Philip Larkin’s poems).

I The poet speaks directly to the reader, adopting the persona of another person
and expressing that person’s thoughts in character (e.g. some of Robert
Browning’s or Donne’s poems).

I The poet expresses many innermost feelings, sharing them with the reader in an
intimate way (e.g., many of Plath’s poems).

I The poet addresses something directly in the second person (you), and praises
its qualities in an emotional, lyrical way (e.g. Iohn Keats’s Odes).

I The poem presents two sides of an argument, sometimes with two different
voices, sometimes reaching a conclusion (e.g. poems by Marvell or Christina
Rossetti).

I The poem is a description — of a person, place or event — moving from a
particular experience to generality, or from general experience to the particular
(many poets).

Layout

Here is an example of prose layout taken from a short story by Katherine Mansﬁeld.
You can see by its descriptive quality that it is literary prose, not the language of,
say, a newspaper article.

Over by the breakwater the sea is very high. They pull off their hats and her
hair blows across her mouth, tasting of salt. The sea is so high that the waves
do not break at all; they thump against the rough stone wall and suck up the
weedy, dripping steps.

Katherine Mansfield The Wind Blows (1920)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

 n .
TIP ACTIV Y3 2

The poet George Macbeth
(1932—1992) said: A poem is
always laid out on the page

Compare the appearance of the piece of prose above (or a page of a novel or
short story, or a magazine article), with the following short poem, which is on

#meurwwtmmmm

 

in a way which has some  a similar topic to the passage above:
significance. 
MW ammwammmmmwj Whitecaps on the bay:
A broken signboard banging
In the April wind.

Richard Wright This Other World (1998)

 

    

in the prose example, the space on the page is filled with words from left to
right; the designer of the book makes the most ofthe available space on the
page, according to the size and format ofthe book as a whole. Where lines
begin or end on the page is irrelevant to the meaning of the sentences written.
in a narrow newspaper column, the words have to fit the space too.

In the poem example, the writer has shaped or patterned the words on
the page deliberately, making choices for effect. Some ofthe lines are longer,
some are shorter, but none of them uses the whole space.

a Concrete poems

Poets can sometimes use extreme methods when they lay out a poem on the page,
knowing that we will be reading it and assimilating its ‘shape’. Here is an example
from a poet whose work often deviates from the normal conventions of punctuation

and layout. The arrangement of the words symbolises the meaning they express,
W and thus describe the poem’s character. This sort of poem is known as a concrete
/ V ' A poem.

Concrete poem see definition -

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

yonthispage;
e
n o r t
ACTWITY3'3 Steve is almost i c h en .
, David talks Good Sense.
See if you can ﬁnd some .
Janeisoften v e r y v a g u 6

other examples of poems

Luc .VERY DENSE.
where the layout is y

_ ~ _ . Catty Cora’s fffffull of sssspite.
Signiﬁcant 1n the way 1t 0

creates shapes or patterns Dick is rather D
on the page. Try writing a D
descriptive poem yourself in

a l
which you vary the size and n e
layout of the words to give a Liz is quite an G , but
visual image of the subject Alan thinks he’s GOD

of the poem.
Attributed to e e cummingsUnit 3: Poetic structures and themes

 

End-stopped line is where V' '7
a line expresses a complete 1 r '
thought. The second line,
although it makes senseon I _
its own, needs the third line to H
complete it and is therefore an?  '
open line. By the time yoiuﬂgetfiy
to the end ofthe fourth lineg’? \‘l
the meaning is running on into ‘
the fifth; white needs orchards “
to complete the meaning of“ i
the phrase. This is knownas‘a‘
run—on line orenjambment w
(from a French word meaning
‘straddling’ or getting its leginto.
the next line): : , " t . r: 

The slight naturalvpauseiinj-f 7 ’

 

the second line after ﬁlledzand}; »_
in the third line after birds is

known as a caesuraeandir‘nost‘ 1
lines of poetry, unless they are
very short, have suchapaus
Sometimes this is emp‘hasi

 

 

 

sed

   

bya punctuatioy’” «arkitow , 3
indicate Whereiyoumight take? a1;
breath ifyou were reading.

    

 

 

Look at the second stanza
of the poem to see if you
can ﬁnd further examples
of end-stopped lines, open
lines, enjambment and
caesura.

End-stopped lines, open lines, enjambment and caesura

The poem that follows shows that a less extreme layout can also be very expressive.
It was written by Siegfried Sassoon for Armistice Day, the day when the First World
War ended in 1918. You can imagine the poet’s intense joy at this experience: he
had been an ofﬁcer in the army and had experienced action himself. You are now
going to see whether the arrangement of the words into lines in the poem helps to
communicate his feelings to you. You will learn some useful technical terms too.

The poem is structured in two stanzas:

Everyone suddenly burst out singing;

And I was ﬁlled with such delight

As prisoned birds must ﬁnd in freedom,

Winging wildly across the white

Orchards and dark-green ﬁelds; on—onwand out of sight.

Everyone’s voice was suddenly lifted;

And beauty came like the setting sun:

My heart was shaken with tears; and horror

Drifted away  0, but Everyone

Was a bird; and the song was wordless; the singing will never be done.

Siegfried Sassoon Everyone Sang (1918)

17

 

1n the second stanza, lines 1 and 2 are end-stopped; lines 3—4 and 4—5
are run-on lines (enjambment). There are weak caesuras in lines 1 and 2
and strong ones in lines 3 and 4, with two strong ones in the ﬁnal line.

I.
Z
M]
2
2
O
UCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

  

W

The difference between a Verse
and a stanza is that a verse
, is usually the regular unit of
,,$;ructure within a hymn,,song ,
o‘rrhymed poem. As theseunits
can also be called stanzas, the

5 W general;
“Ki-pling’s' ye semea
works.) L V ’ l ‘

02m

Sonnet see definition on this
page. “
Avolta is a change of idea'or

mood in a sonnet, usually at line
8 or line 12.

    

    

SAMPLE RESPONSE

ACTIVITY 3.5

Read the whole poem again and try to consider what effect this arrangement
of the lines has. Discuss this with a partner or in a group.

 

Stanza 2 begins more calmly than the previous one, with the end—stopped
lines suggesting that the poet is in control of his thoughts and feelings. But as
he continues, it seems that these cannot be contained in end—stopped lines
and must burst out into the following ones, culminating in a long emotional
line to end each section of the poem, where the caesuras and pauses suggest
spurts of emotion. The final words on—on—and out ofsight and the singing
will never be done give a sense of infinite freedom and joy, and the lengths of
these lines compared with the earlier ones enhance this impression.

Ifthe poem was being read out loud to an audience who did not have the
text in front ofthem, the reader would have to be very skilful to create the
same effects that you grasp visually.

Verse and stanza

Regular verses or stanzas of different lengths have special names as follows:

  
 
 

Number of lines I Name

triplet or tercet

    
    
 

     

octave or octet

Larger groupings than this are much more unusual, and might even be called a
verse paragraph if there are no breaks.

The sonnet

Poets sometimes follow a traditional pattern in the structures they adopt, and there
are many such traditional forms. The one you are most likely to encounter at this
stage is the sonnet, a 14—line poem with particular variations of rhyme, rhythm and
structure. The sonnet is derived from two main varieties: the Petrarchan (or Italian)
sonnet and the Shakespearean (or Elizabethan) sonnet. Shakespeare’s Sonnet 73,
whose metaphors you looked at in Unit 2 (see page 8), is a perfect example of a
Shakespearean sonnet. Many poets have adjusted the strict rhyme scheme of the
Petrarchan sonnet to suit themselves, but usually they follow one of two structures.
The ﬁrst form is an octave (eight lines) followed by a sestet (six lines) which
generally groups the ideas or reﬂections into these two sets of lines. At this point
there can be a change of idea or mood, known as a volta.

A volta can be seen in the following sonnet, Upon Westminster Bridge by the
Romantic poet William Wordsworth.wwmf'nmuaxsactﬁumz . ,



I r

The shaping and arrangement
of lines in a poem reinforce
and support its ideas. You
could express this in another
way: form is essential to
meaning.

 

J

iWWWW

Unit 3: Poetic structures and themes

Earth has not any thing to shew more fair:
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
A sight so touching in its majesty:

This City now doth like a garment wear

The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
Open unto the ﬁelds, and to the sky;

All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
Never did sun more beautifully steep

In his ﬁrst splendour valley, rock, or hill;
Ne’er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!

The river glideth at his own sweet will:

Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;

And all that mighty heart is lying still!

William Wordsworth Upon Westminster Bridge (1802)

The ﬁrst eight lines (the octave) are linked in sound by their rhyming pattern, but

also in meaning, all being one sentence. The poet describes the beauty and majesty

of the city of London as equalling any natural scene (you may think surprisingly

for a nature-loving Romantic poet). The ﬁnal six lines (the sestet) are also linked

in their intertwined rhymes and the way in which they become more personal

and exclamatory in their tone of wonder and awe. (Note too the inversions that 19
emphasise: Never did sun, Ne’er saw I).

This beautiful poem is not just a good example of a Petrarchan sonnet structure,
but worthy of further study of its language and imagery; for example, its use of
extended personiﬁcation and cumulative lists, abstract nouns, parallel phrases and
inversions, all of which express and emphasise the meaning with great delicacy.

 

An early 19th century engraving of Westminster Bridge.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

qamwawWWamammmmmmw.

i
l
l

is

Never forget that the poet’s
choice of form, structure and
language shapes meaning.

mamWrnm-mmsamrwswmwmwwwnm L->»V\I:ev«tmm‘€9

*2.

a

5m aimimrwxmr-auwﬁmwﬁf

 

The second form that sonnets take is the Shakespearean division of three sets of
four lines followed by a ﬁnal couplet which clinches the main idea of the poem.
Here is an example:

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration ﬁnds,
Or bends with the remover to remove.
0 no, it is an ever—ﬁxed mark,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wand ’ring bark,
Whose worth ’3 unknown, although his height be taken.
Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle’s compass come,
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge ofdoom:
If this be error and upon me proved,
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

Shakespeare Sonnet 116

The ﬁrst four lines assert the permanent and reliable quality of love between true
minds; the second group of four lines forms an extended metaphor suggesting that
love is like a star which is used by seafarers to guide their way, even in tempests at
sea, representing life’s vicissitudes. The ﬁnal quatrain claims that even the passage
of time does not alter love, and Time is here personiﬁed traditionally as an old man
with a sickle.

So ﬁrmly does the poet believe what he has written, that he sums up in the ﬁnal
couplet by staking his reputation as a writer and experience as a lover to conﬁrm
what he has said. This is typical of the Shakespearean sonnet: the three quatrains
are self—contained but are all variations on a theme, often using metaphor to extend
and amplify the thought, and the ﬁnal couplet conﬁrms the theme strongly. Once
again the brevity and self—contained perfection of the sonnet form are very eﬂective
for expressing the poet’s thought. You will study closer analysis of the rhythmical
and rhyming patterns of poems such as these in Units 4 and 5.