If you are taking the AS Level course, you normally have a choice between two
kinds of questions: the critical essay on your set text and the passage question, or
close critical commentary, on a poem taken from it. In this unit, you will be given
some guidelines on both alternatives, so that you feel conﬁdent about answering
either type under timed conditions. You may be studying a particular poet, whose
work has characteristic features that you have discussed as part of your preparation,
You may be using an anthology, a collection of poems, some of which have ideas,
or themes, in common. In either case, you have the advantage that you will have
studied the poems beforehand — it is not an unseen poetry paper — and so you will
be writing from a position of strength.

If you are in the ﬁrst year of any advanced course such as A Level or the Pre-U,
you Will often have exercises of this kind to give you practice in poetry criticism, so
the examples here are just as helpful for you.

 

Studying an anthology
An anthology is a collection of poems that will not be by the same writer or even

necessarily on the same topic. However, there will be some links between them and
it is these that the question setter will exploit.

Studying an individual poet

The work of an individual poet will vary, but there will be some concerns that the
writer constantly returns to, and you will be able to ﬁnd these once you know the
whole work well. Additionally there will be characteristic features of style that you
come to identify as typical of your particular poet.

Study techniques

Whether you are studying an anthology or a collection by one poet, the techniques
described below will be helpful.

Begin with individual poems

It is best to read, discuss and analyse individual poems ﬁrst so that you appreciate
each one before you embark on attempting to ﬁnd links between them. Once you
have studied and enjoyed a range of poems, you will begin to see that they have
thematic or stylistic links. For example, your anthology may contain a number

of poems about an aspect of nature or which use the natural environment as a
background; there may be poems about childhood, love, death, time or age; or even
something as apparently mundane as an insect. Your poet may typically use regular
verse forms and rhyme, or syllabic forms or free verse.

Create headingsUnit 6: Timed poetry essays, critical and passage type

 

Love

Sonnet 61 (Michael Drayton)

The Passionate Shepherd to His Love (Christopher Marlowe)
m Sonnet 18 (William Shakespeare) Shall I compare thee 

If you are studying an A Song (ThOmas Carew)

anthology, create a list or N at” re

matrix 0f poem toplcs’ Be Sonnet 31 (Philip Sidney)

d t ﬁ d a oem
pg? 2:12:51; “fem t1; ﬁt the The Procession of the Seasons (Edmund Spenser)
t a

mould, as well as one or
two that appear in two or A Song (Carew)
three lists. In the case of Death

an individual poet, try to
divide the poems into topics
and also identify recurrent
features of style.

Sonnet 73 (Shakespeare) That time ofyear 

Sonnet 73 (Shakespeare) That time ofyear 

A Litany in Time ofPlague (Thomas Nashe)

The Author’s Epitaph Made by Himself (Walter Raleigh)
Written the Night Before His Execution (Chidiock Tichbourne)

You’ll notice that some poems appear in more than one category, and that others
could do so (for example, Written the Night Before His Execution has many
images of nature in it). Your list will therefore be much longer than the number of
individual poems because some will appear twice or more. If you are studying an
anthology, you should be creating a matrix (an arrangement of rows and columns)
of topics in this way, so that you will be prepared for any question in the exam. Use 41
a highlighter to link common themes. Usually you are asked to discuss two or three
poems that are linked by topic, and you will have plenty to choose from. If your set

4 text is a selection of one writer’s work, you will ﬁnd one of the delights of studying
a particular poet is that as you become familiar with the individual poems you
gradually begin to form a sense of the themes and style that characterise her/ his
work.

Poetry critical essay

ACTIVITY 6.2

Below is an example of an essay question and a sample response. Before you
read the essay, read the two poems Esther’s Tomcat and The Jaguar by Ted 
Hughes. Extracts from the poems are provided here. 

Daylong this tomcat lies stretched ﬂat

As an old rough mat, no mouth and no eyes,
Continual wars and Wives are What v
Have tattered his ears and battered his head. 

Like a bundle of old rope and iron

Sleeps till blue dusk. Then reappear

His eyes, green as ringstones: he yawns Wide red,
Fangs ﬁne as a lady’s needle and bright.

Ted Hughes Esther’s Tomcat (1960)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

Essay title: Several poems in your Ted Hughes selection are about animals.
Referring to two poems, discuss how they explore this subject.

The two animal poems l have chosen are both by Ted Hughes and both are
about cats: the first a domestic cat who spends his days sleeping inside and
his nights roaming around outside; and the second a wild member of the cat
family, a jaguar, who is in a cage at the zoo. Although at first sight their lives
are very different, they share a kind of fierce intensity which in the poet’s
eyes, lifts them beyond the everyday world and physical context in which they
spend their lives.

The structure of the poem Esther’s Tomcat introduces the cat asleep in
the house with vivid, visual similes, looking like an old rough mat or like a
bundle ofold rope andiron, but when he wakes in the evening another identity
appears — one with legendary qualities: fangs fine as a lady’s needle; eyes,
green as ringstones.

The poet tells a legend about a fierce tomcat before describing this
particular cat’s nocturnal activities: fighting, killing and mating, always
somehow managing to escape danger. The final stanza images the cat on

-. the rooftops, his mind on the moon stalking over the round world as it sleeps.

This structure emphasises the range of environments related to the cat: its
apparently innocent domestic life, sleeping during the day; its historical
antecedents — the legendary story ofthe vicious tomcat that attacked a
knight; the present cat’s aggression and dominance; and ending with an
image which suggests its mysterious, universal qualities; crying out and
asserting its individuality while the world sleeps. These environments

are contrasted throughout. Far from being an ordinary old pussy cat, it is
something quite different: The poet’s language is very rich in similes and
metaphors which enhance the image of the cat: the diction of old rope and
iron sounds tough but uncouth; as soon as his glowing eyes open the image
ofjewels is used, and his fangs are like a lady’s needle, a medieval image
which links with the legend of the cat and the knight in the next stanza, a
legend which is somehow made more real in the reference to an actual place,
‘Barnborough’, and the fact that the bloodstain is still there after hundreds of
years. The onomatopoeic word grallochs (which means disembowels) sums up
the vicious nature ofthe tomcat’s aggression; his superiority over any dog is
unquestionable.

The poet uses four—line stanzas which vary in length between eight and
ten syllables, though the longest line goes to 11 syllables ~ appropriately the
line describing the knight trying desperately to fight offthe cat. There are
occasional rhymes such as bright, knight and bite, which link the images of
the cat in sound as well as meaning, biting the knight with his sharp bright
teeth; and there are a number of half—rhymes such as quiet and pullet, moon
and men, the first emphasising the cat’s slyness, the second expanding the
range ofthe cat’s activities at night. Hughes makes much use of enjambments
throughout the poem which give weight to the words which follow the
pause, most notably in the gap between stanzas 4 and 5 which climaxes with
the phrase ls unkillable, an explicit statement of fact — no metaphor here,
though perhaps some hyperbole (exaggeration). Esther’s Tomcat is an ironical
title, because it reminds us that though we think we own animals they are
individuals with their own integrity, their own lives and perhaps a significance
beyond the normal.

The Jaguar also has a structure which moves from the everyday world
— here the zoo — to the globe itself in the final stanza. Contrasts between

 

 

 

ummmm” ‘WUnit 6: Timed poetry essays, critical and passage type

  

the different environments are also emphasised: the other animals are
described vividly in metaphorical language as shallow, noisy or lazy, with
none of the intense vitality of the jaguar, which attracts visitors to its cage.
The parrots are like cheap tarts, the apesyawn, the lion and tiger lie still as
the sun a powerful but unmoving. The whole is like a picture painted on a
nursery wall — colourful but static, childish. The people are like children too

— the crowd stares like a child at a dream. In contrast, the jaguar is imaged in
intense paradoxical images, the drills ofhis eyes, on a short fierce fuse, the eye
satisfied to be blind in fire, by the bang of blood in the brain deaf the ear — this
last line illustrates the powerful one—syllable words linked by alliteration of
the b sound, which so contrast with the leisurely lines describing the other
animals such as fatigued with indolence  . The jaguar’s pacing does not
draw attention to his caged state, but rather the opposite: there’s no cage to
him as he strides, his stride is wildernesses of freedom, an evocative metaphor
of space and liberty which contrasts entirely with the closed world of cage
and 200. The poet compares him to a visionary in a cell, a holy man whose
imagination takes him way beyond the narrow space in which he is confined.
Indeed, it seems that his stride makes the world itself turn, so intense is

he: Over the cage floor the horizons come, a conclusion which has strong
similarities with Over the roofs go his eyes and outcry.

Both poems use very vivid images to create the animals and their different
environments, making us think again about the lives of other living beings
and how they exist separately, even though they intersect with ours. Our
imaginations are stirred beyond normal, everyday experience, in the first
poem taking us back to a land of legends, knights and ladies, and in the
second to the life of the mind which can transcend physical confinement. I 43
especially like the contrast between the old tomcat sleeping at home and
what he does outside; but the image of thejaguar whose intensity cannot be

controlled by physical confinement is even more fascinating, and the pace
and sound effects in this poem are very evocative.

  
   
   
   
   
 
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
     
 

 

     
    
   
    
    
 

 

 

  
 

 

The apes yawn and adore their ﬂeas in the sun.
The parrots shriek as if they were on ﬁre, or strut

Like cheap tarts to attact the stroller with the nut.
Fatigued with indolence, tiger and lion

     
    
   
 

Lie still as the sun. The boa-constrictor’s coil E
Is a fossil. Cage after cage seems empty, or
Stinks of sleepers from the breathing straw.
It might be painted on a nursery wall.

 
     
  

Ted Hughes The Jaguar (1957)Cambridge InternationalAS Level Literature in English

 

Poetry passage question

ACTIVITY 6.3

Comment closely on the poet’s concerns and methods in the poem Miners by

Wilfred Owen.
l.

There was a whispering in my hearth, I saw white bones in the cinder—shard,

A sigh of the coal, Bones without number.

Grown wistful of a former earth For many hearts with coal are charred,

It might recall. And few remember.

I listened for a tale of leaves I thought of all that worked dark pits

And smothered ferns, Of war, and died

Frond—forests, and the low sly lives Digging the rock where Death reputes

Before the fawns. Peace lies indeed: '

My ﬁre might show steam—phantoms simmer Comforted years will sit soft-chaired,

From Time’s ‘old cauldron, In rooms of amber,

Before the birds made nests in summer, The years will stretch their hands, well—cheered
ﬂ Or men had children. By our life’s ember;

But the coals were murmuring of their mine, The centuries will burn rich loads

And moans down there r With which we groaned,

Of boys that slept wry sleep, and men Whose warmth shall lull their dreaming lids,

Writhing for air. While songs are crooned

But they will not dream of us poor lads
Lost in the ground.

Wilfred Owen Miners (1918)

 

   

» Few poems range in time and space as widely as Miners. The poet imagines
the very beginnings of earth’s history when dense vegetation fell and was
compressed into what is now dug out and burnt as coal; he thinks of the
miners who risk their lives to do this work and it reminds him of the soldiers in
the trenches who dig pits ofwar. Both risk their lives so that unthinking people
can sit safely and comfortably at home in front of a coal fire, never dreaming
of the poor lads lost in the ground who work to keep them safe and warm at
home. These very different settings and atmospheres are fully evoked by the
language ofthe poem.

The poem’s structure - seven regular four‘line stanzas and a final longer
one ofsix lines — has a kind of circular effect, beginning with the poet sitting
in front of his fire at home and imagining the coal whispering to him of the
distant past, but realising that the coal speaks of the mine and the men
working there, suffering deep below the ground in the airless pits: these
four stanzas form the first half of the poem. There is then one stanza about
soldiers in the trenches suffering similarly, until the return in the two final

SAMPLE RESPONSEGo to Units 28 and 29 in Part3 of
this book for a checklist to remind
~ you ofwhat to considerwhen

: writing undertimed conditions.

 Makesurethatyouranswer
l relates theme and style
throughout, and that you use
‘ examples to support the points
you make. You will not have time
to say everything and the marker
or examiner does not expect

you to!

 

 

Unit 6: Timed poetry essays, critical and passage type

stanzas to the domestic fireside, where now no-one remembers the suffering
which has gone into providing such warmth and security.

The poet makes very effective use of figures of speech and diction.
Personification of the coal itself whispering, murmuring; of Time, like an old
witch with a cauldron producing steam—phantoms; of Death; ofthe years sitting
soft-chaired and stretching their hands to the fire: all these take abstract or
inanimate objects or ideas and give them a kind of sinister life and vitality.

Personifying the years as sitting by the fire and being warmed is much more
effective than just saying that people did it. The poet’s diction is similarly
evocative: thinking of the far distant past before the birds made nests in
summer/ Or men had children he imagines the life forms as low and sly; the
ferns have been smothered to create coal and this links with the men who are
gasping for air in the mine. He uses the physical sensory qualities ofa coal fire
— its hissing and its Cinders — to imagine the coal speaking or creating ghosts
from Time’s cauldron and the white remains of the fire when it has burned
down remind him of the numberless bones ofthose who have died in the mine.

interestingly, he begins in the first person singular as himselfor his
persona sitting by the fire and imagining where the coal comes from in past
and present and its voice speaking to him: I listened, lsaW. But by the time he
gets to the final two stanzas this has developed into the first person plural
our life, we groaned, as if he has associated himself entirely with the miners,
culminating in the us poor lads. This empathy gives the poem a very poignant
quality. indeed, the tone of the poem parallels its structure, moving from a
reflective musing at the beginning to a sense of anger and sadness that the
miners and the soldiers have been forgotten.

The use of half-rhyme in an abab pattern throughout links the words
effectively in meaning as well as sound, for example hearth and earth, where
one depends on the other, or mine and men similarly. This reaches a climax in
the final longer stanza where there are two sets of three rhymed words: loads,
lids, lads, and groaned, crooned and ground. The contrast between the domestic
scenes where people are dozing and babies are being sung to and the wretched
conditions suffered by those who have provided their comfort is very striking.

Owen is known as a war poet ofthe First World War, and this poem does
refer in stanza 6 to conditions in the trenches. ifyou called this a war poem,
as some do, then the mines would symbolise the trenches and the miners the
soldiers. However, the very vivid description ofthe pre-historic world, and the
images ofthoughtless people enjoying the warmth oftheir coal fires, and the
conditions in the mine itself suggest that this is a poem about miners, as the
title makes clear. The reference to the soldiers in the trenches supports the
poem’s theme of sacrifices made by some on behalf of others who don’t even
think of it, the kind of sacrifices we still see in the world today, such as cheap
w clothes being stitched by children or the poor on behalf of wealthier countries.

 

 

K

ACTIVITY 6.4

What other points could you make about the three poems analysed above?
Discuss with your class what other effective points could be made, or
examples given. Go to Unit 29 in Part 3 of this book for a checklist to remind
you of what to consider when writing under timed conditions. Make sure that
your answer relates to theme and style throughout, and that you use examples
to support the points you make. You will not have time to say everything and
the marker or examiner does not expect you to!

 

J

45