Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Unit 10: Characterisation

‘Wmm’,wrymwvwmmﬂmmrmmuwmwmvu

TIP

At more advanced level, a
description ofa character,
or character sketch, is not
enough; some reference

to the way in which the
writer creates the character
(characterisation) and their
contribution to the work as a
whole will be essential.

In almost every novel a
character or set of characters
engages the reader’s interest
from the very outset. In the
opening paragraphs looked
at in Unit 8, it was clear from
most of them that the story
begins with a focus on a
person. in this unit, you are
going to look at some ofthe
techniques used by writers
to present a character in the
novel as a whole.

 

»S,mew;w-;m

Caricature is a depiction ofa
person whose main features
are simplified and exaggerated.
Some of Dickens’s minor
characters are caricatures.

r,
l
3
§
g
g:
i
l

m 9‘

Wm

Characterisation, or the making of characters, is one of the most important features
of any novel and What for many readers makes a novel memorable. It is frequently
the subject for homework essays and examination questions, and your work should
reﬂect your appreciation of both what a character is like and What their place is in
the ideas and structure of the novel as a whole. This is also true of the short story,
though inevitably the characterisation will be less developed in a shorter work.

TIP

Enjoying a novel thoroughly can sometimes lead you into thinking ofthe
characters as real people. Ifa filmed version of your novel has been made,

this is an even easier trap to fall into, as you may associate a character with a
particular actor who plays the part. it’s important to remember that the creation
of character is being employed by the writer for particular effects in the novel as a
whole. '

 

In our lives, we meet people and respond to their age, gender and appearance, what
they do and say, and how they react to us and other people. We know ourselves too,
and reﬂect on our own consciousness, attributes and appearance, though our self-
knowledge is likely to be partial and biased. In a novel, the writer selects a narrative
method (see Unit 7) and then works within this ﬁrst— or third—person structure to
present the appearance, actions and thoughts of characters.

Rounded and flat, three-dimensional and
one-dimensional characters

In creating the world of the novel with its unique and distinctive qualities, the
writer has to focus on and delineate (describe precisely) the main area of interest
and activity. What follows here uses a number of comparisons, some of them
rather mixed, as I try to clarify the point. It is rather like a person using a pair of
compasses: the sharp end is pressed into the paper and a circle is drawn with the
pencil on the other end. (If you have studied John Donne’s poetry, you will be
aware of the potential of this image!) The circle and everything inside it represents
the focus of the novel, with the point at the centre. Characters close to the centre of
the circle may be characterised in full and complex detail, whilst others at the edge
of the circle are simply sketched in.

Another way of describing this difference is to call the detailed characters
‘rounded’ because they are apparently three—dimensional and the simple sketches
‘ﬂat’ characters because they are types: one—dimensional and with perhaps a single
feature or mannerism. In some comic novels, these features are so exaggerated that
you could call such characters caricatures.

It would not be Wise to dismiss their eﬁectiveness though, because they might be
vital to the plot, or add to the expression of the author’s main concerns in the novel,
or act as a contrast or parallel to one of the major characters. So the role or function
of the character does not necessarily depend on the depth and detail with which it
is presented.

 

Mﬁ‘,ures ,

it

uh f

w 5 ‘v—‘sr:1‘Tv:4-a1rrmr A _. ,A  A

Unit 10: Characterisation

 

Close focus on a main character.

Description of characters

The way in which a writer describes a character in a third—person narrative is very
revealing, not only of aspects of the character being presented, but also of the
. writer’s attitude to the character.

ACTIVITY 10.1

Look closely at these descriptions. In what ways and how effectively does the
writer introduce the character/s?

1

John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old;
four years older than I, for I was but ten; large and
stout for his age, with a dingy and unwholesorne skin;
thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs
and large extremities. He gorged himself habitually
at table, which made him bilious, and gave him a dim
and bleared eye With ﬂabby cheeks. He ought now to
have been at school; but his mamma had taken him
hOme for a month or two, ‘on account of his delicate
health.’ Mr Miles, the master, afﬁrmed that he would
do very well if he had fewer cakes and sweetmeats
Sent him from home; but the mother’s heart turned
from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the

¥tr

more reﬁned idea that John’s sallowness was owing to
over-application and, perhaps, to pining after home.

Charlotte Bronte Jane Eyre (1847)

2a

The general had yellowed eyes, Which suggested to
Ifemelu a malnourished childhood. His solid, thickset
body spoke of ﬁghts that he had started and won, and
the buck—teeth that gaped through his lips made him
seem vaguely dangerous. Ifemelu was surprised by the
gleeful coarseness ofhim. ‘I’m a village man!’ he said
happily, as though to explain the drops of soup that
landed on his shirt and on the table While he ate, or his
loud burping afterwards.

 

672b

And then there was Cristina Tomas. Cristina Tomas
with her rinsed—out look, her washy blue eyes, faded
hair and pallid skin. Cristina Tomas seated at the front
desk with a smile. Cristina Tomas wearing whitish
tights that made her legs look like death.

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie Americana/i (2013)

3

Miss Lumley rules by fear. She’s short, and oblong in
shape, so that her iron—grey cardigan falls straight from
shoulder to hip with no pause in between for a waist.
She always wears this cardigan, and a succession of
dark skirts, which can’t possibly be the same one. She
has steel—rimmed glasses behind which her eyes are
hard to see, and black shoes with Cuban heels, and a
tiny lipless smile. She does not send children to the
Principal for the strap, but does it herself, in front of
the class, holding the hand out ﬂat, bringing the black
rubber strap down in sharp quick efﬁcient strokes, her
face white and quivering, while we watch, wincing,
our eyes ﬁlling with involuntary tears.

Margaret Atwood Cat’s Eye (1988)

4
Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with
a comfortable home and happy disposition, seemed to
unite some of the best blessings of existence; and had
lived nearly twenty—one years in the world with very
little to distress or veX her.

Jane Austen Emma (1816)

Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

5

Lily, turning her eyes from him, found herself
scanning her little world through his retina: it was

as though the pink lamps had been shut off and the
dusty daylight let in. She looked down the long table,
studying its occupants one by one, from Gus Trenor,
with his heavy carnivorous head sunk between his
shoulders, as he preyed on a jellied plover, to his

wife, at the opposite end of the long bank of orchids,
suggestive, with her glaring good looks, of a jeweller’s
window lit by electricity. And between the two, what
a long stretch of vacuity! How dreary and trivial these
people were! Lily reviewed them with a scornful
impatience: Carry Fisher, with her shoulders, her
eyes, her divorces, her general air of embodying a
‘spicy paragraph’; young Silverton, who had meant

to live on proof—reading and write an epic, and who
now lived on his friends and had become critical

of truffles; Alice Wetherall, an animated Visiting—

list, whose most fervid convictions turned on the
wording of invitations and the engraving of dinner—
cards; Wetherall, with his perpetual nervous nod of
acquiescence, his air of agreeing with people before
he knew what they were saying; Jack Stepney, with his
conﬁdent smile and anxious eyes, halfway between
the sheriff and an heiress; Gwen Van Osburgh, with
all the guileless conﬁdence of a young girl who has
always been told that there is no one richer than her
father.

Edith Wharton The House ofMirth (1905)

 

Lu
m
2
O
n.
u:
Lu
n:
in
.i
n.
2
<
V)

 

1 John Reed is one of the unpleasant Reed family who make Jane’s early
life a misery. The descriptive adjectives used for him suggest a pale
and unhealthy complexion: ding , dim and bleared, for example. He is
unhealthin fat because he eats too many sweets: we are told he is large,
stout, heavy and flabby. The reason for this becomes clear: he is entirely
spoilt by his mother who has convinced herself that he should spend a
couple of months at home instead of being at school because he has been
working too hard and is homesick, though his master at school seems to
have a clearer—sighted view. John is not a major character in the novel
but at this point he is used as a contrast with Jane, who is bright but
thin, undernourished and victimised. She is hated by her aunt, John’s
mother, and treated very badly, unlike her cousin. it is Jane’s critical and
judgemental eye which provides us with this little portrait, telling us of her
difficult situation in the Reed household.Unit 10: Characterisation

 

2 These two brief descriptions are of minor characters in the novel
Americanah. In a few words Adichie creates vivid portraits. The general’s
physical attributes are closely linked with his character: the phrase gleeful
coarseness is particularly apt, suggesting a self—satisfied crudity of manner.
The main character’s aunt is his mistress and the reader is not encouraged
to think positively of him here: a little later he abandons the aunt. His
yellowed eyes and thickset body suggest both an unhealthy lifestyle
and an aggressive nature and his proud claim to be from the country,

I’m a village man, does not suggest innocence or lack of sophistication,

but perhaps a distance from civilised behaviour. He is strong, confident

and unsubtle. lfemelu, the protagonist of the novel, is a black Nigerian

woman and Cristina Tomas is registering her for a course. During their brief

interchange, Cristina Tomas is very patronising. This briefsketch reveals

through physical description her lack of vitality. Diction such as rinsed out,

washy, faded, pallid establishes both the colour of her skin (white) and

her bland colourless nature. Her whitish tights enhance this impression so
 that her legs look like those of a corpse. Adichie does not need to say that

 Cristina is white: the diction makes this clear, associating her pallor with

if an uninteresting nature.

3 Although the novel is recounting past events, the passage is in the present
tense, giving it an immediacy which adds to the picture of the sadistic
teacher here. The sentence structure emphasises by repetition the simple
confidence of her actions: she is, she wears, she has, she does; this makes
her seem very determined. The colours associated with her are dark or
metallic ones: iron-grey cardigan, steel-rimmed glasses, dark skirts, black
shoes and, of course, a black strap with which to hit those pupils who
have done something wrong. There is little of humanity about her. Atwood
says that you can’t see her eyes and her smile is tiny and lipless. Although
her beating is undertaken in a very efficient way, the final detail ofthe
description is particularly disturbing: when she is administering the strap,
herface is White and quivering, from some undefined emotion — anger,
perhaps, or a kind of sadistic passion. The class can only watch wincing as
she hits the unfortunate miscreant. The sounds and rhythms of the final
sentence are worth noting: her face white and quivering, While we watch,
wincing, our eyes filling with involuntary tears. The use of alliteration of
the ‘w’ sound here (white, While, we, watch, wincing) and assonance of
quivering, wincing, filling is as evocative as any poet’s line, and suggests,
interestingly, some sort of link in meaning as well as sound, a commonality
of emotion between the teacher and the class. And this is borne out at the
end of the chapter where the protagonist observes:

 

69

Although Miss Lumley is not what anyone thinks of as a girl, she is also not a
boy. When the brass handbell clangs and we line up outside our GIRLS door,
Whatever category we are in also includes her.

4 Emma and her situation are described in five adjectives: handsome,
Clever, rich, comfortable and happy. These are strong words which have
no shadow of ambiguity about them. Combine these with her youth,
and Emma has everything one could wish for! But Austen’s prose always
reveals a very careful choice of words: in seemed to unite some ofthe
best blessings ofexistence — seemed strikes a warning note, and this is
confirmed when the reader is told she had lived to this point with veryCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

little to distress or vex her. Austen suggests here that perhaps never having
had to face distress or vexation is not the best way to become mature.
Always having had looks, brains and money might not be the best way

of developing as a person. Moreover, are these the best blessings of
existence? There is nothing here of those virtues which could be called
blessings, such as kindness, unselfishness, sympathy and so on. In this
brief paragraph, Austen establishes herself as an omniscient narrator
who is clear—sighted and who may be critical Later in the novel, she does
present Emma’s own thoughts and feelings, but it is clearthat these are
often restricted by Emma’s limitations, which Austen makes the reader
aware of through the irony of two different points of view: Emma’s and her
creator’s.

5 This savage description ofthe wealthy house party as they dine is seen
through the eyes of Lily, the novel’s protagonist, or rather, it is seen
through her eyes scanning the scene through [the] retina of another
character, Selden, who is very influential in the novel in reminding her
of the shortcomings of wealthy society and its values. She has earlier
been trying to convince herself that she should do her best to become
engaged to a wealthy but very dull young man, and a few pages previous
to this passage she has been ‘talking up’ the group that she here criticises
so sharply. We could point to the predatory images of Gus Trenor, which
are to be developed later on in the novel, and of his wife looking like the
jeweller’s Window, whose concern for the family’s money makes her a

formidable adversary later on in the novel, and to each of the other named

m characters, all of whom will play a part in Lily’s downfall. These ironies

unfold with the progress of the novel. But here, the description of these
shallow, unlikeable people, each pinpointed with a sharp little comment,
is a study in point of view as much as a description of character: it reveals

Selden’s attitude, seen through Lily’s description, and behind them both,

the social criticism of the novelist herself. The passage goes on to show

Lily’s saving grace: the intelligence which makes her aware that she has
changed her mind about this social group.

 

 

K

Associating characters with settings or

sym bols
Another way in which characters can be presented is by associating them with a
part1cular setting or symbol, a phy51cal representation of an idea or quality.
Consider a novel or Short I In Great Expectations (Dickens), Miss HaVisham is always associated with a
story you are studying: dark room full of dust, cobwebs and images of the past.
do any ofthe Characters I The bleakness of Heathcliff’s character in Wathering Heights (Bronte) is
haVe a Symbol attaChed emphasised by association with the moors and their wild weather, his
to them? What eifect relationship with Catherine like the rocks beneath the earth.
(1068 this haVe: ﬁrstly 011 I In The Great Gatsby (Fitzgerald) contrasts the house of Tom and Daisy
the characterisation, and Buchanan with that of Jay Gatsby: the former old and well established, part
secondly 0n the WOrk aS of the wealth of a dynasty; the latter new and built to impress, with a library
whole? Are any of the containing books whose pages have not even been cut and a cupboard full of
Characters aSSOCiated With a beautiful but unworn imported silk shirts.
partiCUIar setting? I In Thomas Hardy’s Tess of the D’Urbervz’lles, the phases of Tess’s life are

enhanced by the diﬂerent natural settings in which they take place.3r

 
  
  

 

t. it is a word used in relation
music as well.

In Doris Lessing’s Martha Quest, the dress that Martha makes for the dance
symbolises her independence from her parents and her rejection of her mother
in particular.

In George Eliot’s Middlemarch, the symbols of mirror and window represent
respectively the ego (the personality focused on itself) and the more altruistic
and outward—looking escape from self.

Books symbolise the mind’s expansion and development in Eliot’s The Mill

on the Floss: Maggie’s love for them is sadly not exploited as she is a girl and
therefore is thought not to need education, whilst her brother Tom is not at all
academic and wants to do practical things but must be educated as he is the boy
of the family.

In Ihumpa Lahiri’s The Namesake, the name Gogol which is given to the main
character symbolises European culture, something he would like to rid himself
of as the novel progresses.

Adichie’s Americanah uses the symbol of African hair and its springy tight curls
to represent quintessential African nature: lively, untameable, distinctive. The
ﬁrst chapter is set in a hairdressing salon and this i  continues through the

 

novel.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

ACTIVITY 10.3

If possible, discuss with a
partner or a classmate the
characters of the novel you
are studying. How many are
created in depth? Are they
paralleled/contrasted with
another character in any
way?

 

Parallels and contrasts

Minor characters can contribute to the plot or enhance the themes of a novel
by providing reinforcement of the qualities of a major character, or, conversely,
throwing their characteristics into clear relief by the contrast they provide.

   
  
  

    
   

  
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
     
  
  
 

Example of main character I Parallel/contrast

Mrs Elton in Emma — shallow, pretentious
and snobbish

Miss Bates — loquacious and boring but
good-hearted and open, unlike Mrs Elton,

   

  

— interfering and spiteful Emma herself interferes, but she learns

her lesson as the book develops and gains
sense andjudgement.

   
      

Elinor in Sense andSensibi/ity Her sister Marianne. Each acquires some

of the characteristics of the other as the
novel proceeds.

 
  
   

 

   

Olanna in Halfofa Yellow Sun Her sister Kainene. This troubled

relationship is arguably the most
important one in Halfofa Yellow Sun.

 
  
 
   

    
  

Rochester in Jane Eyre is used to
represent the passionate nature ofJane.

St John Rivers is a more cool person and
can be argued to represent order and
control.

 
 
 
 

Some literary critics argue that Bronte is more successful in her creation of Jane
Eyre than of these two male characters, who are criticised as unconvincing and
two—dimensional. However, if you realise their structural function in the novel
as contrasting with each other and intensifying Jane’s nature (the novel’s main
concern), then they could be seen as more successful.

In the next unit, you will look at writing Prose essays of different types.

\ “M— x