188

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

Individual passages

The following activities may be done as Unseens,

the end of each one as help towards close analysis.

Passage 1: from The Mill on the Floss by George Eliot

Write a critical appreciation of the following passage.

1

The rush of the water and the booming of the mill

bring a dreamy deafness, which seems to heighten the
peacefulness of the scene. They are like a great curtain

of sound, shutting one out from the world beyond. And
now there is the thunder 0f the huge covered wagon
coming home with sacks of grain. That honest waggoner
is thinking of his dinner, getting sadly dry in the oven

at this late hour; but he will not touch it till he has fed

his horses, — the strong, submissive, meek—eyed beasts,
who, I fancy, are looking mild reproach at him from
between their blinkers, that he should crack his whip at
them in that awful manner as if they needed that hint!
See how they stretch their shoulders up the slope toward
the bridge, with all the more energy because they are so
near home. Look at their grand shaggy feet that seem to
grasp the ﬁrm earth, at the patient strength of their necks,
bowed under the heavy collar, at the mighty muscles of
their struggling haunches! I should like well to hear them
neigh over their hardly earned feed of corn, and see them,
with their moist necks freed from the harness, dipping
their eager nostrils into the muddy pond. N 0w they are on
the bridge, and down they go again at a swifter pace, and
the arch of the covered wagon disappears at the turning
behind the trees.

Now I can turn my eyes towards the mill again, and
watch the unresting wheel sending out its diamond jets
of water. That little girl is watching it too; she has been
standing on just the same spot at the edge of the water
ever since I paused on the bridge. And that queer white
cur with the brown ear seems to be leaping and barking
in ineffectual remonstrance with the wheel; perhaps he is
jealous because his playfellow in the beaver bonnet is so
rapt in its movement. It is time the little playfellow went
in, I think; and there is a very bright ﬁre to tempt her: the
red light shines out under the deepening grey of the sky.
It is time, too, for me to leave off resting my arms on the
cold stone of this bridge 

Ah, my arms are really benumbed. I have been
pressing my elbows on the arms of my chair, and
dreaming that I was standing on the bridge in front of
Dorlcote Mill, as it looked one February afternoon many
years ago. Before I dozed off, Iwas going to tell you what
Mr and Mrs Tulliver were talking about, as they sat by the
bright ﬁre in the left-hand parlour, on that very afternoon
I have been dreaming of.

George Eliot The Mill on the Floss (1860)

Unseen alert! lfyou are doing this as an Unseen, do not read on.

First thoughts on Passage 1

1 Very descriptive of the water and the horses

2 Focus on a little girl and her dog

3 Seems to be part of the scene herself

\

or you can answer the questions at  jTIP

Context: if you are studying
Eliot, compare her writing
with Jane Austen’s. There is
no dialogue, no humour, no
irony; it is more descriptive,
its narrator is more intrusive.
There is more direct address
to the reader. However, both
are written in the third person
— they are not first-person
narratives. If we were to

read both novels, we would
be struck by the wealth of
wider social comment made
by Eliot, but Austen’s close
scrutiny ofa small group in a
community, whilst less broad,
is very intensive.

 

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

4 Speaks directly to the reader

5 Focuses at the end on what is going to happen next (the conversation

between Mr and Mrs Tulliver)

Find examples to illustrate these points and comment on them.

 

 

k

1 Water and mill — metaphor: curtain, thunder, unresting wheel;
onomatopoeia: rush, booming. Suggests power, constant movement,
exclusion of world beyond. The horses are also powerful: grand...feet,
patientstrength, mighty muscles. They are powerful but meek and
submissive. This could suggest that it is possible to tame them, to use
them. The environment is evidently an agricultural one — they are carrying
grain sacks, but they are perhaps also contrasted with the water, which is
more powerful but also tamed to an extent, and, if you know the novel, the
girl, whose powers are constantly suppressed to try to make her meek (but
you could not know this from this passage so early in the novel).

2 The child is, however, very focused: so rapt in its movement; juxtaposed
with the dog which is leaping and barking, she is capable of quiet attention
and absorption in the scene before her, suggesting what sort of character
she may turn out to be.

3 The novelist imagines herself at the scene, watching: Now / can turn my
eyes towards the mill again; lpaused on the bridge — this has the effect of
a narrator who is telling a true story, because she was there at the scene.
She is not afraid to intrude on the narrative, and seems to empathise with
the characters’ feelings: not only the girl and the waggoner, but the horses
and dog as well.

4 She makes a number of direct addresses to the reader: See; Look; Ithink;
Before I dazed ofli l was going to tel/you. This should be taken together with
the previous point. We are always aware of her presence telling the story.
And although she speaks of dreaming, we do not find the narrative at all
dreamlike - it has a very naturalistic feel. Try not to use the words reality or
realism when you are talking about the world ofa novel. The 19th century
novelists, of whom Eliot is one, did try to create worlds which seem close
to ‘real life’, but of course, it is not real life: the novelist shapes the material
(verisimilitude).

5 She looks ahead to what happens next: the narrative proceeds clearly; we
know what has happened and will see her comments on the significance of
it. She guides the reader throughout.

This passage is very descriptive. In addition to the metaphors and similes,
used for the water and the horses, the use of the verbs is worth noting.

The passage is written in the present tense (perhaps you thought this was

a modern ideal). in the second paragraph, the —ing form is used a great

deal, either descriptively, as in unresting and deepening, or as the present
continuous form of the verb: watching, standing, leaping, barking, resting.
These give an active immediacy to the situation and to the description,
settingthe scene of the girl and the water, which will remain with us until the
end ofthe novel.

 

189Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Passage 2: from Great Expectations by Charles Dickens

ACTIVITY 23.3

Write a critical appreciation of the following passage.
Note: Pip has come into a fortune from an unknown benefactor and is about
to leave the Forge where he has lived his life up to this point, cared for by Joe

and Biddy.

2

‘Saturday night,’ said I, when we sat at our supper of
bread and cheese and beer. ‘Five more days, and then
the day before the day! They’ll soon go.’

‘Yes, Pip,’ observed Joe, whose voice sounded
hollow in his beer-mug. ‘They’ll soon go.’

‘Soon, soon go,’ said Biddy.

‘I have been thinking, Joe, that when I go down
town on Monday, and order my new clothes, I shall
tell the tailor that I’ll come and put them on there,
or that I’ll have them sent to Mr Pumblechook’s. It
would be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the
people here.’

‘Mr and Mrs Hubble might like to see you in
your new genteel ﬁgure too, Pip,’ said Joe,
industriously cutting his bread, with his cheese on
it, in the palm of his left hand, and glancing at my
untasted supper as if he thought of the time when
we used to compare slices. ‘80 might Wopsle.

And the Jolly Bargemen might take it as a
compliment.’

“That’s just what I don’t want, Joe. 'Ihey would
make such a business of it,—such a coarse and
common business,—that I couldn’t bear myself.’

‘Ah, that indeed, Pip!’ said Joe. ‘If you couldn’t
abear yourself—’

Biddy asked me here, as she sat holding my sister’s
plate, ‘Have you thought about when you’ll show
yourself to Mr Gargery, and your sister and me? You
will show yourself to us; won’t you?’

‘Biddy,’ I returned with some resentment, ‘you are
so exceedingly quick that it’s difﬁcult to keep up with

’

you.

(‘She always were quick,’ observed Joe.)
‘If you had waited another moment, Biddy, you

would have heard me say that I shall bring my clothes
here in a bundle one evening,——most likely on the
evening before I go away.’

Biddy said no more. Handsomely forgiving her,

I soon exchanged an affectionate good night with

her and Joe, and went up to bed. When I got into my
little room, I sat down and took a long look at it, as a
mean little room that I should soon be parted from
and raised above, for ever. It was furnished with

fresh young remembrances too, and even at the same
moment I fell into much the same confused division of
mind between it and the better rooms to which I was
going, as I had been in so often between the forge and
Miss Havisham’s, and Biddy and Estella.

"lhe sun had been shining brightly all day on the
roof of my attic, and the room was warm. As I put the
window open and stood looking out, I sanoe come
slowly forth at the dark door, below, and take a turn
or two in the air; and then I saw Biddy come, and
bring him a pipe and light it for him. He never smoked
so late, and it seemed to hint to me that he wanted
comforting, for some reason or other.

He presently stood at the door immediately
beneath me, smoking his pipe, and Biddy stood there
too, quietly talking to him, and I knew that they
talked of me, for I heard my name mentioned in an
endearing tone by both of them more than once.

I would not have listened for more, if I could have
heard more; so I drew away from the window, and sat
down in my one chair by the bedside, feeling it very
sorrowful and strange that this ﬁrst night of my bright
fortunes should be the loneliest I had ever known.

Charles Dickens Great Expectations (1860)

Unseen alert! lfyou are doing this as an Unseen do not read on.Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

 

 
  

  

TIP

Context: striving to better oneself is an important theme of the Victorian novel,
but it is often conceived in purely materialistic terms. It will take the whole novel
for Pip to appreciate moral betterment and the enormous misapprehensions that
have accompanied hisjourney through the novel.

 
   
   
   
 

ACTIVITY 23.4 ‘

Consider the following questions in relation to Passage 2.

1 There are three characters involved directly here: Joe and Biddy, and Pip
the narrator — with some mention of others. Look at the phrase soon go at
the beginning of the passage. What is the tone of each of these phrases? In
other words, how does each character say the same words?

2 What does the little interchange between Pip and Biddy in the middle of

the passage suggest about Biddy? You should include Ioe’s comment about
her.

3 Find examples which show how Pip is now thinking of himself as above
those around him, both at home and in his immediate environment.

4 Flhere are also hints that beneath his growing snobbery is an awareness of
what he is losing and a sympathy for those he is leaving behind who have
always loved and cared for him. Find examples in the language which
support this.

5 ‘Ah, that indeed, Pipl’said Ioe. you couldn’t abearyourself—’ What does
this draw attention to? Think about what Pip thinks of himself now, and
what Ioe’s unﬁnished comment suggests about diiferent ways of looking at
a person’s sense of identity, by other people.

 

191

6 What impression do you gain of Joe from reading this passage? Find brief
examples to support your points.

7 Consider the interplay of dialogue with description in this passage and the
effect of this.

8 In what ways does the ﬁnal sentence of the passage sum up its themes?

 
  

TIP

Your answers to these questions should help to show that a first-person narrator
can be very limited in his/her thoughts, focused on their own self-importance.
The novelist must offer other possible interpretations of words and actions forthe
reader to notice, in order to point the irony. How does Dickens achieve this here?Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Passage 3: from The Courthouse by Tahmima Anam

ACTIVITY 23.5

Read the following passage from a short story and ﬁnd examples for the text
boxes on page 193.

Note: Following the death of Iqbal, Rehana’s husband, Iqbal’s brother has
been successful in a legal bid to adopt the children of Iqbal and Rehana. They

have just left.

3

In the morning the children were gone. Rehana
had packed their things in a hurry, crying into

the comb, the ragged copy of Treasure Island,
forgetting to fold, jamming shoes into the corners
of the trunk. Sandwiched between their clothes 5
was a photograph of Iqbal in his three-piece suit,
one thumb hooked into his waistband, another

on the dial of his pocketwatch. She packed a

copy of the Holy Book, then took it out. She had
tried to write them a letter, but she had no words. 10
Finally she settled for a few mooris1 and a bar of
chocolate.

Afterwards, when the door was shut behind
them, Rehana turned to ﬁnd their little things
strewn over the bedroom, the corridors. A sock, 15
a sliver of ribbon. A page from Sohail’s notebook.
The stray things rattled around the bungalow like
a cough.

They still called it the bungalow, because it
was a modest house on a vast, empty plot — a 20
one—storey building with just two bedrooms,

a drawing room, a kitchen, a wrap—around

veranda. The bedrooms faced the garden and the
empty land beyond; the living room and kitchen
faced the street. There were plans for a grander 25
house at the back of the property. The bungalow
would be for Visitors, perhaps an ofﬁce. But Iqbal
hadn’t stayed to build the big house.

It was Iqbal’s idea to buy the plot in
Dhanmondi. Less than a year after they were 30
married, he had insisted they move out of their
ﬂat on Aga Masih Lane in the old part of town.
Rehana was reluctant to go; she loved the narrow
streets, the smell of the Buriganga river, the
shuttered buildings built by the ﬁrst pioneers into 35
the city: the river-boat owners, the traders, the
Bible—wieldingJesuits. It had a sense of its own
history. Dhanmondi, on the other hand, was a

new residential area, just a few dirt roads carved

out from the paddy. It’s the future, Iqbal had 40
said. Soon this will be the best neighbourhood in
Dhaka.

And so it was. Sprawling, ﬂat—roofed buildings
set back from the road, speaking of prosperity
and newrnoney. 45

Rehana looked out at her tract of empty land.
She had created a border with rose bushes and
red hibiscus and a pair of banana trees. Inside
the border was the bungalow, the small vegetable
patch, and the sagging mango tree that had come 50
with the plot. Beyond it the land was wild, the
earth soft and yielding, the kind of earth that
swallowed sandals and sprouted thick tufts of
moss even on the coldest days.

Rehana unlatched the veranda gate and 55
stepped into the garden. She took off her sandals
and felt the grass prickling her feet, and then,

a few seconds later, the cool embrace of silt

between her toes. She made her way to the back

of the garden, and found the small garden tap 60
she’d used to water her roses — pink — all through
the dry season. Their tired blooms surrounded

her, staring as she kneeled in front of the tap and
pressed her forehead against it. The metal felt

cool and indifferent; once she twisted the knob, 65
inviting her to squat underneath the stream,

which she did, bending her neck to make it ﬁt.

She had been here before; she knew what to do.

She sat under the tap until she was fully
soaked. She was not sure if she was cold. She 70
closed her eyes and felt the poisonous sting
behind them. Then she lay down beneath the tap
and fell asleep.

Tahmima Anam The Courthouse (2006)

1 mooris (L.ll): rice snacksUnit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

 

 

ACTIVITY 23.6

Refer to the checklist in Unit 29,

which includes general guidance Copy and complete the following text boxes following the instructions at the foot l
on tackling unseen prose of each box for writing about passage 3. After you’ve done this, you’ll be looking “
Passages- closely at the different sentence structures used in the passage. The ‘Themes’ box l

is left until last, but you may want to look at that box ﬁrst to help you.

Narrative position

Third—person omniscient narratorfocused on one
character; past tense, no dialogue.

Subject and situation

One character’s thoughts and actions following the
taking away of her children; domestic setting — her
home and garden, with her memories of her previous
house. However, her husband’s words and ideas are
reported.

l
Give brief textual support for the above points from l
Passage 3. 3

Give brief textual support for the above points from .
Passage 3. ' i. ‘
Structure  V
Does the passage tell a straightforward story of
Rehana’s actions? How do the third and fourth i
paragraphs contribute, for example? '

 

      
      
 
 
   
  
    
     

Diction and figures of speech
Words and images relating to the children and their
activities.

Personifications in the penultimate paragraph — what
effect does this have?

Give your response to the above questions about i 

Passage 3, with examples.
193

 

Give exam les ofthe above oints from Passa e 3.
p p g Tone and atmosphere

Does the third-person narrator of the story betray any
direct sympathy for Rehana? How does the writing
show this rather than telling it to us?

,____...,
Symbolism

Are any aspects of the house and garden used
symbolically to represent the writer’s concerns, or
Rehana’s situation and state of mind? You could
consider objects in the house too.

 

How would you describe the atmosphere of the
passage?

 

Give your response to the above questions about
Passage 3, and find examples to support your point
of view.

Give your response to the above questions about
Passage 3, with examples.

 

 

Themes

Loss — personal and environmental

Contrast of past and present

Memory

Contrast of built environment and natural world

Multicultural references suggest a post-colonial
setting.

Find examples of the above themes in Passage 3.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Ciese study a sentence structure

All good prose writers use a variety of sentence structures to express their work
in the most effective way. If you look closely at Passage 3 above, you will see that
Anam is no exception.

ACTIVITY 23.7

Look at this table on Passage 3, The Courthouse, by Tahmirna Anam. Find
further examples from the passage and note the effects they create.

  
     

  
 
     
    

Simple short sentence Andso it was. (line 43) Emphasis oflqbal’s point

of view.

  

   
   
  
  
 

    
  
  

Longer descriptive
sentence with a number of
clauses

Beyond it the land was
wild, the earth soft and
yielding, the kind of earth
that swallowed sandals and
sprouted thick tufts of moss
even on the coldest days.
(lines 51—54)

Develops the atmosphere
of the garden, incorporates
a transferred epithet for
Rehana herself, soft and
yielding, relates to life with
the children (lost sandals),
implies the richness of
nature even in a suburb.

  
     
     
     
    
    
    

 

   
   

   
  
 

   
  
 

Continuous action words
to show what Rehana is
doing at the beginning.

Repeated present
participles (—ing parts of
the verb)

crying ... forgetting ...
jamming (lines 2 and 4)

   
   
   
    
 

    
  

   
  

Sentence fragments A sock, asliverofribbon.

(lines 15 and 16)

Physical images ofthe
disconnected suggest what
life has become as well as
symbolising the children’s
concerns.

  
 
    
    
         

Use of lists  the river—boat owners, Emphasises the rich

the traders, the Bible- diversity of the area and its
wielding Jesuits. (lines 36 history. '
and 37)

 

     
     
    
        

  

Reported speech It’s the future, Iqbal had Although the passage is
said. Soon this will be the all about Rehana and her
best neighbourhood in thoughts and feelings, the
Dhaka. (lines 40—42) presence of her husband is
felt through the passage.
This scrap of reported

speech is part of the effect.Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

Passage 4: from Disgrace by J. M. Coetzee

ACTIVITY 23.8

Write a critical appreciation of the following passage.

Note: David Lurie is a university professor of literature who is attracted by
Melanie, one of his students. Meeting her by accident, he has invited her in
and cooked supper for them. He has just given her a drink.

4

As she sips, he leans over and touches her cheek.
‘You’re very lovely,’ he says. ‘I’m going to invite you to
do something reckless.’ He touches her again. ‘Stay.
Spend the night with me.’

Across the rim of the cup she regards him steadily.
‘Why?’

‘Because you ought to.’

‘Why ought I to?’

‘Why? Because a woman’s beauty does not belong
to her alone. It is part of the bounty she brings into the
world. She has a duty to share it.’

His hand still rests against her cheek. She does not
Withdraw, but does not yield either.

‘And What if I already share it?" In her voice there
is a hint of breathlessness. Exciting, always to be
courted: exciting, pleasureable.

‘Then you should share it more Widely.’

Smooth words, as old as seduction itself. Yet at
this moment he believes in them. She does not own
herself. Beauty does not own itself.

ACTIVITY 23.9

‘From fairest creatures we desire increase,’ he says,
‘that thereby beauty’s rose might never die.’

Not a good move. Her smile loses its playful,
mobile quality. The pentameter, Whose cadence once
served so well to oil the serpent’s words, now only
estranges. He has become a teacher again, man of the
book, guardian of the culture-hoard. She puts down
her cup. ‘I must leave. I’m expected.’

The clouds have cleared, the stars are shining. ‘A
lovely night,’ he says, unlocking the garden gate. She
does not look up. ‘Shall I walk you home?’

‘No.’

J. M. Coetzee Disgrace (1999)

‘From fairest creatures we desire increase/That thereby beauty’s
rose might never die’: from Shakespeare’s first Sonnet.

Unseen alert! Ifyou are doing this as an Unseen do not read on.

Analyse the text and ask yourself the following questions.

1 What tense and person are the passage written in? What effect does this
have? (Hint: past or present? ‘I’ or ‘He/she’?) When you’ve ﬁnished all
the questions, you could return to this question and think about it again,
exploring Coetzee’s use of focalisation and its effects.

2 How does the language show that the focus is on the ‘he’ of the passage
— ﬁnd some examples. These can include moments where he makes
assumptions about her responses. (Hint: consider the word breathlessness,

for example.)

3 Find some examples of words or phrases which describe Melanie’s
responses and feelings. What effect do they have? They may help you to

anSwer Q6.

195Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

 

Look again at page49 in Unit7, 5
where focalization is discussed.
It is possible forthe main
character ofa novel, or indeed a
play, to be unlikeable (Macbeth
is a murderer, forexample; so

is Balram in The White Tiger).
Yet, because we have access

to theirinnermostthoughts
and feelings, we cannot be
indifferentto them. 8

your response.

4 Find an example to show that he sees life in literary terms. What effect
might this have on his behaviour?

Using the evidence from this passage, how would you describe the
attitudes David seems to hold about women?

6 Consider the possible response of readers to the two characters. Where do
your sympathies lie? Find detailed examples in the language to support

7 If you answered 6 above by saying you were more sympathetic to Melanie,
see if you can ﬁnd any places where you have some sympathy for David.
Justify your response.

Consider the image of ‘the serpent’s words’ and the ﬁnal description of the

night sky — what effects do these have in the passage?

9 Some of the ‘sentences’ used are not complete sentences. Find examples
and discuss their effects.

10 How would you describe the tone of this passage? In what ways does
Coetzee create irony, for example?

Passage 5: from Never Let Me Go by Kazuo lshiguro

The passage below is the very end of the novel Never Let Me Go (2005) by Kazuo
Ishiguro. I want you to read it before I give you any details about it.

ACTIVITY 23.10

Read the following passage closely and consider.

5

But, as I say, I don’t go searching for it, and anyway, by
the end of the year, I won’t be driving around like this
any more. So the chances are I won’t ever come across
it now, and on reﬂection, I’m glad that’s the way it’ll
be. It’s like with my memories of Tommy and of Ruth.
Once I’m able to have a quieter life, in whichever
centre they send me to, I’ll have Hailsham with me,
safely in my head, and that’ll be something no one can
take away.

The only indulgent thing I did, just once, was a
couple of weeks after I heard Tommy had completed,
when I drove up to Norfolk, even though I had no
real need to. I wasn’t after anything in particular and
I didn’t go up as far as the coast. Maybe I just felt like
looking at all those ﬂat ﬁelds of nothing and the huge
grey skies. At one stage I found myself on a road I’d
never been on, and for about half an hour I didn’t
know where I was and I didn’t care. I went past ﬁeld
after ﬂat, featureless ﬁeld, with virtually no change
except when occasionally a ﬂock of birds, hearing

my engine, ﬂew up out of the furrows. Then at last I
spotted a few trees in the distance, not far from the
roadside, so I drove up to them, stopped and got out.
I found I was standing before acres of ploughed
earth. There was a fence keeping me from stepping
into the ﬁeld, with two lines of barbed wire, and I
could see how this fence and the cluster ofthree or
four trees above me were the only things breaking
the wind for miles. All along the fence, especially
along the lower line of wire, all sorts of rubbish had
caught and tangled. It was like the debris you get on
a seashore: the Wind must have carried it for miles
and miles before ﬁnally coming up against these
trees and these two lines of wire. Up in the branches
ofthe trees, too, I could see, ﬂapping about, torn
plastic sheeting and bits of old carrier bags. That
was the only time, as I stood there, looking at that
strange rubbish, feeling the wind coming across those
empty ﬁelds, that I started to imagine just a little
fantasy thing, because this was Norfolk after all, and
it was only a couple ofweeks since I’d lost him. I wasthinking about the rubbish, the ﬂapping plastic in the
branches, the shore—line of odd stuff caught along the
fencing, and I half—closed my eyes and imagined this
was the spot where everything I’d ever lost since my

Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

got beyond that — I didn’t let it — and though the tears
rolled down my face, I wasn’t sobbing or out of
control. I just waited a bit, then turned back to the
car, to drive off to wherever it was I was supposed

childhood had washed up, and I was now standing to be.

here in front of it, and If I waited long enough, a tiny
ﬁgure would appear on the horizon across the ﬁeld,
and gradually get larger until I’d see it was Tommy,

Kazuo Ishigu ro Never Let Me Go (2005)

Unseen alert! lfyou are doing this as an Unseen do not read on.

and he’d wave, maybe even call. The fantasy never

   

   

Dystopia‘n‘fi‘ction,
or‘U't‘

Handm'aidlsTa/e. These Works
areoften used tocom'rnent

critically on aspects of present _

society. {

 

and; Méar‘gafrétiAtwood Effie“ : L 7’ ,‘

COMMENT

This passage is a ﬁrst-person account of what the persona does, and

to an extent what she thinks and remembers. It may be difﬁcult for
you to decide what to write about it, because it contains a lot of factual
information about what the persona does and sees, but doesn’t have
much in the way of language features such as description or metaphor.
There is also a matter—of—fact tone.

Background information

The novel is a dystopian fantasy, or ‘speculative ﬁction’, about young
people who are clones created for the speciﬁc purpose of being
‘donors’, who supply vital organs for ‘normal’ people through a series
of ‘donations’ that eventually lead to the donor’s death, which the
characters refer to as ‘completion’. (You will notice a reference to
Tommy ‘completing’ at the beginning of the second paragraph.)

Kathy, the ﬁrst—person narrator, is now 31 and her referenceto it
at the beginning of the extract is to the school, Hailsham, where the
young clones were brought up. Tommy and Ruth were her closest
friends and she was in love with Tommy. She had trained as a ‘carer’,
someone who looked after the donors, but even the carers were used
eventually for donation: they just bought themselves a little extra time.
Ruth has already died and Tommy has done so very recently.

However, the novel is not only about the horrifying idea of people
being used by society in this way; it is also a coming—of-age novel, with
much to say about relationships and the meaning of life generally.

A writer can deal with these themes by making the novel extremely
descriptive and dramatic, as with The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret
Atwood, where the thoughts and emotions of the ﬁrst—person narrator
Offred are vividly demonstrated, using the present tense as well as the
ﬁrst person, and much imaginative language. Ishiguro’s employment of
a ﬁrst-person narrator who has learned over the years to suppress her
emotions and never to allow more profound thoughts to emerge means
that the language used is undramatic, unembellished and often ﬂatly
factual. This is challenging for you as a literary critic. (This technique
is also used in Ishiguro’s The Remains of the Day.)

197Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 23.11

Closely analyse the language in Passage 5 by considering the following:

1 What is going to happen to Kathy within the next year or so? Give detailed
support from the passage.

2 What evidence is there in the passage that Kathy is not an impulsive or
unconventional person, but is obedient to what she is supposed to do?

3 Find examples of her ‘chatty’ style of speaking to the reader. Are there any
clichés?

4 Read What Kathy does and sees, and write this in one or two sentences.
What effect does the detailed and factual account of her movements and of
the appearance of the ﬁeld have here? You are not conﬁned to the limited
vocabulary used by Kathy.

5 What ﬁgure of speech is the word ‘complete’ as used in the passage? What
effect does this have?

6 Just a little fantasy thing — what does this language tell us about the kind of
person Kathy is, or has become?

7 Although the passage is written in quite simple vocabulary, the image of
the scraps of rubbish caught in the barbed wire could be seen as a symbol
of the life Kathy has had: in fact, she herself says this. How effectively does
it suggest the life she has had? (You do not need to have read the novel to
try to answer this.)

a 8 Comment on the effect of the words odd and strange.

9 Just using the last two sentences of the passage, say what you can about
Kathy.

10 How effective do you ﬁnd this sort of writing which has been described as
ﬂinching from the pain it relates? '

Unseen prose comparisons

As with poetry, you need to be systematic in your approach. Look again at method
1 and method 2 for structuring a poetry comparison, in Unit 20. If you want to do
these entirely unseen, avoid the guidance questions.

ACTIVITY 23.12

Read closely and consider carefully the two passages below. Then compare
and contrast the two passages.

Note: Passage A is by Tim Winton, an Australian writer, Passage B by Annie
ProulX, an American. In Passage A, the narrator is going to seek out his
father who left his wife and family 20 years before and has gone to live on

his own in the Outback (the remote bush country in Australia). His son has
brought a message from his mother who is dying of cancer. In Passage B, the
main character has given up city life for the country, left his wife for another
woman (Catherine) and has ideas about making money out of playing music.
Both passages contain references to Australian or American trees and shrubs
whose names may be unfamiliar to you.Passage A

I drove on up the thin black road awhile until I found
the dirt turnoff indicated by the pencil map. The track
was broad but muddy from the recent rains and when
I turned into it the car felt sluggish and skittish by
turns. I really had to concentrate to keep from sliding
off into the scrub. Out here the earth was red, almost
purple. Set against it, the ﬂesh-coloured eucalypts
and the grey—blue saltbush seemed so high—keyed

they looked artiﬁcial. I had expected a desert Vista,
something rocky and open with distant horizons,

but this woodland, with its quartzy mullock heaps
and small trees, was almost claustrophobic. Mud

. clapped against the chassis and wheel arches. When

I hit puddles, great red sheets of water sluiced the
windscreen. Wrestling the wheel, I drove for half an
hour until I came to a junction marked with a doorless
fridge. It corresponded to my pencil map; I turned
north. Five minutes later I turned off onto a slippery
rutted track that ended in a four-way fork. After some

Passage B

He came out of the hemlocks into brushy tangled
land and missed the narrow track hidden in weeds

at the left. He had to back up to make the turn at the
rusted mailbox leaning out of the cheatgrass like a
lonesome dog yearning for a pat on the head. The
guitar sounded in its case as Catherine’s car strained
up the grade, alder and willow whipping the cream—
colored ﬁnish. The potholes deepened into washouts
and shifting heaps of round, tan stones. He passed an
old pick—up truck abandoned in a ditch, its windshield
starred with bullet holes, thick burdocks thrusting

up through the ﬂoor. Snipe felt a dirty excitement, as
though he were looking through the train window
again. When the Peugeot stalled on the steep grade he
left it standing in the track, though it meant he would
have to back down the hill in the dark.

He felt the gravel through the thin soles of his
worn snakeskin boots; the guitar bumped against his
leg, sounded a muffled chord. A quarter of a mile on
he stopped and again took out the creased letter.

Dear Sir, Iseen your udyou wanted to play with a
Group. [got a Group mostly myfumily wepluy contry
music. We play Wed nites 7 pm you want to come by.
— Euo Twilight.

A map drawn with thick pencil lines showed only
one turn off the gravel road. He folded it along the
original creases and put it back in his shirt pocket so

Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

hesitation I took the most northerly trail and drove
slowly through old diggings and the pale blocks of
fallen walls. The car wallowed through shimmering
puddles and the track narrowed until saltbush glissed
against the doors.

I’d begun to sweat and curse and look for some
way of turning back when I saw the dull tin roof and
the rusted stub of a windmill amongst the salmon
gums. A dog began to bark. I eased into the clearing
where a jumble of makeshift buildings and car bodies
was scattered, and the moment I saw the man striding
from the trees beyond, I knew it was him. I stalled the
car and did not start it again. I was dimly aware of the
dog crashing against the door, pressing itself against
the glass at my shoulder. It really was the old man. He
was taller than I remembered and I was startled by
the way he carried himself, the unexpected dignity of
him. All my manly determination deserted me.

Tim Winton Commission from The Turning (2005)

 

it lay ﬂat and smooth. He’d come this far, he might as
well go all the way.

The grade leveled off and cornfields opened up on
each side of the track. A mountaintop farm. Godawful

 

 

.. ~ (an?! :N.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

place to live, thought Snipe, panting and grinning. He the window, see ﬂeering mouth and squinting eyes
could smell cow manure and hot green growth. Pale before it turned away. Amok, amok, came a ferocious
dust sprayed up at every step. He felt it in his teeth, baying and barking from the dogs chained to narrow
and when his ﬁngers picked at his face, ﬁne motes lean—tos beside the house. They stood straining at
whirled in the thick orange light of the setting sun. the edges of their dirt circles and clamored at his 7%
A hard, glinting line of metal roof showed beyond strangeness. Snipe stood on the broken millstone that "
the cornﬁeld, and far away a wood thrush hurled cold served as a doorstep. Threads of corn silk lay on the
glissandos into the stillness. granite. He was let into the stiﬂing kitchen by the child
The house was old and broken, the splintery gray whose uncontrolled face he had seen.

clapboards hanging loosely on the post-and—beam
frame, the wavery glass in the windows mended with
tape and cardboard. A hand—painted sign over the door Unseen alert! Ifyou are doingthis as an Unseen, do not read on.
said GOD FORGIVES. He could see a child’s face in

Annie Proulx Heartsongs (1994)

ACTIVITY 23.13

Answer the following questions. What similarities did you note between these
two passages? You should look at the situation, the characters and what they
are doing and any other language details.

At ﬁrst sight the passages seem very similar, having much in common.
You could have noted:

I Both have one main, male character, seeking something.

COMMENT

I Both involve journeys by car into the deepest countryside; both
involve pencil-drawn maps, diﬂicult narrow roads.

I The cars struggle and stall.

I The ways are punctuated by abandoned items: a doorless fridge, an
oldpick—up.

I Their destinations are tin huts, makeshift buildings, an air of
neglect.

I There are characters at their destination: the father, and the child at

the window as well as the members of the band Snipe has come to
meet.

I At the level of language details, the idea of airlessness is mentioned
— claustrophobia in the ﬁrst and the stiﬂing kitchen in the second;
both use the word glissando (a musical term for a sliding effect) or its
abbreviation gliss.

I Structurally, the passages both reach the destination being sought.
Both stories are told in the past tense.Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

 

REMINDER
See page 151 in Unit 19 for a

reminder of metonymy and
synecdoche.

 

ACTIVITY 23.14

What differences are there between the two passages? Find brief quotations to
support these points.

Setting

Writers often use setting symbolically or metonymically to enhance our
appreciation of what is happening in a character’s life. The description of the
car in Passage A is almost personiﬁcation: it is sluggish and skittish by turns.
When the wet road attacks it, mud clapped against the chassis; red sheets of
water sluiced the windscreen, the Vigorous description transfers itself to the
narrator’s turbulent feelings, which are barely evident in the passage directly.
The old diggings and the pale blocks of fallen walls symbolise the crumbled
relationship he has with his father, the broken family. In Passage B, there are
many more sensory descriptions of sight, sound, touch and smell. The guitar’s
sound is evoked on two occasions, almost personifying it, reminding us of
the reasons for Snipe’s visit. The word glissando used for a thrush in Passage B
also reminds us of the importance of music; in Passage A it is just the sound
of grasses against the car. The two indicators on the road — the fridge without
a door and the abandoned vehicle full of bullet holes — symbolise lives at

the edge of ‘civilised’ life: the broken family and the rough life riddled with
Violence.

Narrative position

Passage A is narrated in the ﬁrst person and B in the third person. Given that
the aim of both characters is to reach a particular destination with a speciﬁc
purpose, it is important to consider how the choice of narrative position
affects the presentation of their state of mind. Look closely at all evidence
which suggests state of mind. The following comparative table may behelpful.

Passage A Passage B

Snipe felt a dirty excitement...

He’d come this far, he might as well
go all the way.

Godawful place to live, thought

I really had to concentrate 

I had expected...

After some hesitation 

I’d begun to sweat and curse and

look for some way of turning back... SHiPe, panting and grinning.

He felt the gravel 
He could smell cow manure ...
He felt it in his teeth 

I knew it was him.
I was startled ...
I was dimly aware [ofthe dog]

All my manly determination deserted
me.

 

You can see that the ﬁrst-person narrator tells us what he is doing, and to
some extent thinking, in more detail than Snipe does. If you had to choose
only two of the examples in column A above, which would you choose? And
which would you take as contrast from column B?

I would choose from column A I ’d begun to sweat and curse and look for
some way of turning back with He’d come this far, he might as well go all the
way from column B; and All my manly determination deserted me from A
with Godawfulplace to live, thought Snipe, panting and grinning from B. The

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

201Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

account suggests Snipe’s state of mind is much less fraught, with might as
well and Godawful place. You can’t imagine our ﬁrst narrator panting and
grinning Snipe is open—minded and hopeful of the future. There is something
grimly determined about the narrator of Passage A.

You may also have noticed that the ﬁrst narrator tells us in detail what
he did with simple verbs: I drove, I turned, I took. He appears to be very
controlled and only occasionally do his emotions escape, as we see above.
When they do, they are profound: Winton builds to the climax here of the
grown-up man meeting his father after 20 years. His journey is one into the
past.

 

Other characters

The father in Passage A is the purpose of the narrator’s Visit and the emotional
investment of the passage is focused on him, not surprisingly. In Passage B,
the child’s face at the window is part of the strange atmosphere that Snipe has
come into, of poor hill farmers whose literacy is poor. Catherine is mentioned:
a reader might have wondered why Snipe was driving Catherine’s car, not his

own.
&““MWW‘WW”W” ’ » If you read the whole story, you will discover that it is Catherine who
g TIP has money and a job, and Snipe depends on this while he dreams of making
 come)“: these are Stories?“ money from being in a band. The character of Eno Twilight is implied in his
g the Country’ th‘? OutbaCkf m letter, its spelling and grammar poor, as is the environment of his house when
places whlch still have Wild .
. we see 1t.
% places. Lle may be closer
g to the natural enVIronment, Atmosphere
3 but human interactions—of Th h , . _ 1 , f 1. 1
‘ family, ofshared interests, ese are atmosp er1c pieces, creating a c ear image 0 an a 1en rura
g of conflicts _ m ay be as raw environment, a place far from the ‘normal’ routine; this is where the events of
g as the land which surrounds f the story will happen. These are poor environments for people, though Snipe
§ them.  enjoys the ‘excitement’ of slumming it.
E .3
Waamammwmvmmmammamwﬁ
ACTIVITY 23.15
Compare and contrast the following passages of prose.
Note: Passage A is from a short story by Nam Le; Passage B from a novel by
Anita Desai. The narrator in A is Vietnamese, but now living in the United
States; he has just picked up his father, who is Visiting for the ﬁrst time, from
the airport. In B, the main character, Deven, arrives home to ﬁnd his wife has
returned from a Visit to her parents. Manu is their son.
Passage A the kitchen, I grabbed the three-quarters—full bottle of
‘You’ll sleep in my room, Ba.’ I watched him warily Johnnie Walker from the second shelf of my bookcase
as he surveyed our surroundings, messy with books, and stashed it under the desk. I looked around. The
papers, dirty plates, teacups, clothes — I’d intended desktop was gritty with cigarette ash. I threw some
to tidy up before going to the airport. ‘I work in this magazines over the roughest spots, then ﬂipped

room anyway, and I work at night.’ As he moved into one of them over because its cover bore a picture ofChairman Mao. I quickly gathered up the cigarette
packs and sleeping pills and incense burners and
dumped them all on a high shelf, behind my Kaﬂia
Vintage Classics.

At the kitchen swing door I remembered the
photo of Linda beside the printer. Her glamour shot,
I called it: hair windswept and eyes squinty, smiling
at something out of frame. One of her eX—boyfriends
had taken it at Lake MacBride. She looked happy. I
snatched it and turned it facedown, covering it with
scrap paper.

As I walked into the kitchen, I thought, for a
moment, that I’d left the ﬁre escape open. I could hear

rainwater gushing along gutters, down through the
pipes. Then I saw my father at the sink, sleeves rolled
up, sponge in hand, washing the month—old crusted

Passage B

He stood very still, though he was immensely agitated,
and immensely worn out by a sleepless night spent

at the bus depot. ‘Why didn’t you tell me you were
returning today? I would have come to the station to
meet you.’

‘I did write,’ she snapped, and pointed at an
unopened letter that lay on the small table neXt to his
chair. ‘You never opened it,’ she accused him, and
started sweeping again.

He did not move out of her way but stood
watching her crawl about the ﬂoor, sweeping the dust
into little hills before her. He found he was no longer
irritated by the sight of her labour, or disgusted by the
shabbiness of her limp, worn clothes, or her hunched,
twisted posture, her untidy hair or sullen expression.
It was all a part of his own humiliation. He considered
touching her, putting an arm round her stooped
shoulders and drawing her to him. How else could he
tell her he shared all her disappointment and woe?

But he could not make that move: it would have
permanently undermined his position of power over
her, a position that was as important to her as to him:
if she ceased to believe in it, what would there be for
her to do, where would she go? Such desolation could
not be admitted. So he turned aside, asking, ‘Where is
Mann? I don’t see him. Manu!’

‘He has gone to the neighbours to show them his
new clothes,’ Sarla said, not looking up. ‘My parents
have given him new clothes. And shoes.’

He nodded, entirely accepting this slap to his
pride and dignity as the breadwinner. He deserved

Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

mound of dishes. The smell was awful. ‘Ba’, I frowned,
‘you don’t need to do that.’

His hands, hard and leathery, moved deftly in the
sink.

‘Ba’ I said, halfheartedly.

‘I’m almost ﬁnished.’ He looked up and smiled.
‘Have you eaten? Do you want me to make some
lunch?’

‘77101',’ I said, suddenly irritated. ‘You’re exhausted.
I’ll go out and get us something.’

I went back through the living room into my
bedroom, picking up clothes and rubbish along the
way.

‘You don’t have to worry about me,’ he called out.
‘You just do what you always do.’

Nam Le The Boat (2008)

their insults. They were perfectly right to insult him.
When had he last bought his son anything? And now
of course he never would - he was ruined.

He sat down on the cane chair and stared out of
the open door at the garden gate, waiting for Manu.
At least, that was what Sarla thought he was doing.
She felt moved to ask, ‘Tired? Shall I make you tea?’
Contrary to appearances, she was actually quite

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

203Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

pleased to be back in her own domain, to assume all went to fetch a duster, shouting from the kitchen,
its responsibilities, her indispensable presence in it; in ‘How could you let the house get so ﬁlthy? Why didn’t
her parents’ home she had missed the sense of her own you call for the sweeper to come and clean?’
capability and position.

Deven only shook his head, saying nothing. She
began to get irritated by his inaction. She wanted to
get on with the cleaning of the house. She got up and

ACTIVITY 23.16

4 25
Answer the following question. i I v

Anita Desai In Custody (1984)

Unseen alert! ifyou are doing this as an Unseen do not read on_

Essay title: What similarities did you note between these two passages? You
should look at the situation, the characters and what they are doing and any

other language details.
.—
Lzu You could have said:
2
g I Domestic situation — one person cleaning up after the other’s mess:
U a father and son, a wife and husband. The one cleaning is the one
I who has arrived after a journey and found housework needing to be
done.

I Guilt, tiredness and irritation are present in both.
'lheme of family pressures is present in both.

Both refer to other close people important but not present — the
photo of the girlfriend, Linda; the son Manu.

ACTIVITY 23.17

What differences are there between the two passages? Find brief quotations to
support these points.

Setting
Both passages are set in the main character’s home. Passage A is much more
descriptive of the environment than Passage B.

I In Passage A, what impression do you get of the room and the occupant
from the narrator’s descriptions in paragraph 1? Consider some of the
cultural associations of the objects mentioned — What effect does this have?

I Which objects are mentioned in Passage B? What effect does this
diiference have?Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

 

 

l: / 11p Narrative position

‘ context: the Vietnamese
man who has made his Passage A l Passage 3
home in the United States lst person 3rd person, focused mostly on Deven,
is surrounded with the but there is a change later in the
paraphernalia 0f the Focus on actions (find examples of Passage- (can you identify Where
(relatively) wealthy and these actions) exactly?)
culturally complex first
world'.DeV.en and his Wife Are there any examples of the first FOCUS 0“ thoughts and feenngs (ﬁnd
live qUIte Slmply arld arénOt person’s thoughts and feelings? You examples of these, firstly related to
We“ Off‘.T,he'r relat'onsh'p will need to look closely here to find DEVe" and the“ t0 Sarlal- YOU have a
is a trad't'onal one: base‘j anything obvious. great many examples to choose from.
on respect for different
epons'b'l't'es' ' Characterisation

What impression do you gain of the characters in each of these passages? Give
examples to support your points. For which of the characters have you gathered
more evidence? What effect does this have on your response to the character?
Does Deven’s self—criticism and self—questioning make you sympathetic to him?

 

 

 

Use of dialogue

Here is not much dialogue in either passage. However, in Passage A the son

tells his father what to do and his father is conciliatory. Any tension is below

the surface. In Passage B, there is more open hostility between husband and (
wife. The questions are aggressive ones. (Find examples of this.) ‘(

Language features 205
Both writers use lists — ﬁnd some examples and consider what effect they have

. as well as how they differ from each other. What is the effect of rhetorical
questions in Passage B?

Tone
Who is dominant in each situation and how is this conveyed in the tone of
each passage? In any domestic situation there may be a power struggle and
these extracts illustrate this struggle clearly. Find some examples of this.
Do you ﬁnd any humour or satire in the presentation of the ﬁrst—person l .
narrator’s way of life in Passage A?

Comparing poems and prose passages

When comparing two pieces in different genres, the form must be considered. You may
ﬁnd it easier to use Method 1 for structuring your comparison (see Unit 30) simply
because of the different forms, but make your decision based on the particular exercise.

ACTIVITY 23.18 1 7

Read and consider the following. The poem I like to see it lap the Miles is by
Emily Dickinson and the prose passage is from Bombay and Son by
Charles Dickens.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

A To ﬁt its Ribs and crawl between
I like to see it lap the Miles — Complaining all the while

And lick the Valleys up — In horrid — hooting stanza —
And stop to feed itself at Tanks — Then chase itself down Hill —

And then — prodigious step
And neigh like Boanergesl —

Around a Pile of Mountains — 'lhen — punctual as a Star
And supercilious peer Stop — docile and omnipotent
In Shanties — by the sides of Roads — At its own stable door —

And then a Quarry pare

Emily Dickinson llike to see it lap the Miles (1862)

1 Boanerges means ‘sons ofthunder’, a name given by Jesus to two
ofhis disciples

B
The ﬁrst shock of a great
earthquake had, just at
that period, rent the whole
neighbourhood to its centre.
Traces of its course were
visible on every side. Houses
were knocked down; streets
5 broken through and stopped;
deep pits and trenches dug in
the ground; enormous heaps
of earth and clay thrown up; ‘
buildings that were undermined
and shaking, propped by great
beams of wood. Here, a chaos of
carts, overthrown and jumbled
together, lay topsy—turvy at the
bottom of a steep unnatural hill;
there, confused treasures of iron
soaked and rusted in something
that had accidentally become a

 

pond. Everywhere were bridges that led nowhere; of confusion to the scene. Boiling water hissed and
thoroughfares that were wholly impassable; Babel1 heaved within dilapidated walls; whence, also, the
towers of chimneys, wanting half their height; glare and roar of ﬂames came issuing forth; and
temporary wooden houses and enclosures, in the most mounds of ashes blocked up rights of way, and wholly
unlikely situations; carcasses of ragged tenements, and changed the law and custom of the neighbourhood.
fragments of unfinished walls and arches, and piles In short, the yet unﬁnished and unopened

0f scaffolding, and wildernesses of bricks, and giant Railroad was in progress; and, from the very core of
forms of cranes, and tripods straddling above nothing. all this dire disorder, trailed smoothly away, upon its
There were a hundred thousand shapes and substances mighty course of civilisation and improvement.

of incompleteness, wildly mingled out of their places,
upside down, burrowing in the earth, aspiring in the
air, mouldering in the water, and unintelligible as 1 Babel is a city mentioned in the Bible, also known as Babylon
any dream. Hot springs and ﬁery eruptions, the usual

attendants upon earthquakes, lent their contributions

\

Charles Dickens Dombey and Son (1848)Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

ACTIVITY 23.19

Ask yourself the following questions. What similarities did you notice
between these two pieces? You should look at the subject matter and theme,
setting and any aspects of description they have in common.

You could have said:

COMMENT

landscape.
Both are descriptive pieces.

ACTIVITY 23.20

I Both are about the coming of the railway and its relationship to the

Both have a sense of massive scale.
Both inspire awe and admiration.
Both use a classical reference (Boanerges and Babel).

What differences are there between the two pieces? Find brief quotations to

support these points.

The voice of the poem

ls written in the first person: [like to
see, although after the first line there is
no more obvious first person.

Setting

An appreciative long view of the rural
landscape is being taken, with the
train belonging — a part of it all.

Language and imagery

No direct mention of what it is, but
extended personification of the train
itself as an animal, sometimes a horse,
sometimes a smaller domestic animal.

Many ofthese words are of one syllable
— what effect does this have?

Can you find any examples of diction
which suggest something monstrous
rather than domestic? (NB these words
are not of one syllable.)

 

Passage B

Is written from a third-person
omniscient view, with the final .
sentence particularly confident and
ironic.

The environment is an urban one —
chaotic and nightmarish. The railways
will be destructive, apocalyptic, even.

No direct description of the train

itself but an extended metaphor of an
earthquake, a chaotic and even hellish
environment.

Find some words which suggest the
fragmentary nature of the scene, the
remains of devastation.

Find examples of the use of the four
elements (earth, air, fire, water). What
effect does this have?

 

207Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

    

How is the landscape described? Comment on the use of adjectives and

adverbs (modifying words).

What is there to say about the diction
ofthe final paragraph?

      
 
   
   
    
 

 
   
   
   
   

Structure and form
A poem of regular stanza form with
a regular abcb rhyme, though the
rhyming words are pararhymes, not
full rhymes. What effect could this
have?

   
   

Find examples of alliteration,
assonance, onomatopoeia, and
comment on their effect.

  
 
  

  
 
  
 

Did you notice here, there, everywhere,
nowhere?

     
 
 
  

Find examples of alliteration,
assonance, onomatopoeia.

  
  
  

Find examples of incremental phrases
and clauses — what effect do they
have?

   
 
 

How does the poem move to a climax?
Do you find this effective?

   
 
 

How does the passage move to a
climax? Do you find this effective?

In what ways is this a poetic piece of
prose?

 
  

  
     
  

    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

Tone

What impression do you get of the
persona’s attitude towards the train?

  
   

What impression do you get ofthe
writer’s attitude towards the coming
of the railway? Consider the contrast
between the longer paragraph and the

final paragraph. What figure ofspeech
is involved here?

  
  

  
  
  
   
  
    
   

Find evidence of humour, a
comfortable acceptance ofthe great
innovation. Is the tone simply one of
admiration?

 
  
 

   
  
  
   
  
  
 

Theme
Dickinson’s poem has a playful quality,
as does the train kittenishly chasing

its tail downhill. It is almost a riddle

in that the subject is never openly
mentioned.

     
    

Dickens is all too aware ofthe potential
for destruction wreaked by the railway.
He shows a clear sense of the social
and environmental upheaval brought
by the railways.

 
     
 

In spite of a few reminders of the
monstrous and powerful nature ofthe
train, it is contained, with the scale put
into perspective by the massiveness of
the landscape with its distant views. it
does not seem threatening as it is put

away finally into its stable like a horse.

 
 
      
 
     
 
     

Dickinson suggests it has a kind of
permanent, fixed, reliable quality, as
well as being a new shiny invention.

 
     
 

  

The railway is something to be amused
by, to enjoy, not the beginning ofthe
end ofthe peaceful world.Unit 23: Prose Unseens and Comparisons

    
   
  

   
 

TIP

Context: these two pieces of writing, very different in tone and effect, are both
inspired by an enormous social change, part of an industrial revolution which had
far—reaching effects. Both writers are ambivalent, but Dickinson is much more
confident that the great continent, the great culture, the great landscape will all
contain this new threat; Dickens’s fears of chaos seem prescient to us today.

 
   
 
 

5 f Using the detailed notes
"  above, together with your
_, examples and suitable
: discourse markers, write up
  your comparison.

    
    
   

   
 

In the next Part we are going to look at Advanced Drama exercises. _ l

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

209