Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Unit 25: Drama passage questions

 

Refer to the advice given on
answering passage questions
in Unit28 ofthis book.

The ﬁrst exercises here are designed to help you to look closely at the language
of an extract or scene. This will prepare you for the passage question essays on
Shakespeare and Miller which follow.

Passage question 1: Shakespeare

ACTIVITY 25.1

Note: In Measure for Measure, the Duke has left the city of Vienna and
appointed Angelo his deputy to look after the running of the state. Angelo

is very strict and decides to enforce the ruling that fornication is punishable
by death. Claudio, whose case is being discussed here, is engaged/informally
married and has made his girlfriend pregnant, but Angelo does not accept
this informal marriage and sentences Claudio to be executed. Escalus is an
old, wise lord, trying here to advise Angelo.

We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape till custom make it
Their perch, and not their terror.
Ay, but yet 5
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
Than fall and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman,
Whom I would save, had a most noble father.
Let but your honour know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue, 10
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attained th’ effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life 15
Erred in this point which now you censure him,
And pulled the law upon you.
’Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Another thing to fall. I not deny
The jury, passing on the prisoner’s life, 20
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try: what’s open made to justice,
That justice seizes. What knows the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? ’Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we ﬁnd, we stoop and take’t, 25
Because we see it; but what we do not see
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence

ANGELO:

ESCALUSZ

ANGELO:Unit 25: Drama passage questions

 

For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,

When I that censure him do so offend, 30
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death

And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

[Enter PROVOST]
ESCALUS: Be it as your wisdom will.
ANGELO: Where is the Provost?
PROVOST: Here, if it like your honour. 35
ANGELO: See that Claudio

Be executed by nine tomorrow morning.
Bring him his confessor; let him be prepared,
For that’s the utmost of his pilgrimage.
[Exit PROVOST]
ESCALUS: Well, heaven forgive him, and forgive us all. 40
Some rise by sin and some by virtue fall,
Some run from breaks of ice and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.

V Shakespeare Measure for Measure Act 2 Scene 1

ACTIVITY 25.2

Answer the following questions and then discuss with a group or with your
classmates. 217

I Analyse the metaphor used in the ﬁrst four lines. How effective is the idea
of a scarecrow for the deterrent effect of the law?

I Escalus has three arguments against Claudio being sentenced to death
— what are they? (The ﬁrst is in lines 5—7 and involves a metaphor from
gardening, the second is in lines 7 and 8 and suggests inherited qualities,
and by far the most lengthy argument is in lines 9—17.)

I Escalus gets to the point in lines 15 and 16. What dramatic effect does it
have that he is imagining in lines 9—14 all the possible eventualities by
which Angelo could have found himself in the same position? What does
it say about Escalus’s character?

I ’Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus, /Another thing tofall. In what tone
is this comment made? What impression do you get of Angelo’s character
from this?

I Angelo argues in lines 19—27 that the law is impersonal. Those who ‘ j
administer laws may be corrupt or blind, but he sees justice as simply the
letter of the law, taking no account of the personal thoughts and desires

that lie behind a person’s actions. This leads him to say that whether he has
~ > - had those faults himself is irrelevant; what matters is that if he commits
PTOIGPSiS, sometimes Called the same crime then he should receive the same punishment: Let mine

fOrEShadOWing or adumbratlon’ own jadgmentpattern out my death, /And nothing come in partial. What

[00kg forward to What '5 .gomg further impressions of him are created by this?
to happen; the opposne IS

analepsis — looking backwards
in a story. (See the King Lear ii 3
unseen in Unit 26,) If you know the play you will be aware that Angelo will be caught in just such a

situation and have to face the consequences. This is known as prolepsis.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

    
  
   

  

untested, he has a very clear—cut View of the law and of
justlce. He uses another metaphor in this speech which suggests what may happeI1
— what is it?
Yhejewel that weﬁnd, we stoop and take’t, /Because we see it’. What sort ofper
does this?

I Look closely at the last four lines of the scene. What does line 40 show about
the character of Escalus? Lines 41, 42 and 43 are expressed as general truths
about crime and punishment — what effect does this have? The lines are rhymin

g
couplets. What does this contribute to the tone of Escalus’s words?

COMMENT
E
:3"
ﬂ
5
E
H.
:3"
5
"U
s»
(I:
(D
3)

(TO
('D
G
E.

(m .
E
{:h
n
93
D
H.
H
O
H.
D“
(D

"2‘.

Q
$33
U)
A}
S
:3"
EL
no
6<
S:
8"
SD

broad part of the question.

Characterisation

There are two characters here, Escalus and Angelo. Escalus seems
very moderate and reasonable and, in fact, we see him after this scene
dealing fairly with other miscreants. His ﬁnal lines are thoughtful
and philosophical, having a choric function (see Unit 15 on the use of
a a chorus). Although he respects the law, he is thinking of Claudio as
a person and imagining the possibility that Angelo himself may have
more to his character than is apparent. May Heaven forgive him is a
sympathetic and devout thing to say.

Angelo is very strict, very sure, very black and white in. his View of
the law and justice. He is self—righteous, and his nothing come in partial
shows a man of extremes, the antithesis of Escalus. Angelo’s use of the
Vivid images of scarecrows and birds of prey, and jewels on the ground
perhaps suggests a more imaginative mind than the lawgiver who says:
Sir, he mast die. The audience may feel such a person is being tested.

(You could refer to the Duke brieﬂy here.)

Themes

Vienna needs to be better controlled (What is the evidence for this?),
but there is also a sense that self—control is important. (You could

ﬁnd some textual examples to support this.) The foreshadowing of
Angelo’s crime is a piece of dramatic irony — even if the audience do
not know the plot of the play, they will be aware that such self-conﬁdent
assertions show dangerous pride which could have unfortunate
consequences.

The speed of events

Shakespeare’s plays, the drama moves very fast, maintaining audience
involvement, even while giving the impression that more time has
actually passed.

,.Unit 25: Drama passage questions

You have plenty of points with which to answer the passage
question. You can either ﬁt them in at the end of each paragraph, or

write in more detail about them in the ﬁnal paragraphs of your main
body.

Passage question 2: Shakespeare

 

Iago talking to Othello.

ACTIVITY 25.3

Read the passage below from Othello, using close reading techniques to
analyse it.

Note: In the following scene from Othello, Act 5 Scene 2, Othello has come to
Desdemona’s bedchamber to kill her, believing she has been unfaithful
to him.

It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul:

Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars.

It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood,

Nor scar that Whiter skin of hers than snow

And smooth as monumental alabaster — 5
Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men.

Put out the light, and then put out the light:

If I quench thee, thou ﬂaming minister,

I can again thy former light restore,

Should I repent me; but once put out thy light, 10
Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature,

I know not Where is that Promethean heat

That can thy light relume. When I have plucked thy rose,

I cannot give it Vital growth again;Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

It must needs wither: I’ll smell it on the tree. 15
[He kisses her]

0 balmy breath, that dost almost persuade

Justice to break her sword! One more, one more!

Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee

And love thee after. One more, and this the last.

So sweet was ne’er so fatal. I must weep. 20

But they are cruel tears: this sorrow’s heavenly —

It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.

Shakespeare Othello Act V Scene 2

W V

Answer the following questions and then discuss in a group or with your
classmates. As this is a soliloquy, your analysis will be central to a comment
on the characterisation of Othello himself.

I Lines 1—6 focus on trying to convince himself that he is doing a good
thing. Which one of the six lines expresses this most directly? Why does
he repeat the words the cause, and what does it mean? Why does he
mention his soul? What effect does this have?

What images does he use to describe her skin? Do they tell us
a something about his attitude to Desdemona? ('lhink about the associations
of snow and alabaster.)
Why does he call the stars chaste? What effect does this have?

I Lines 7 to part of 13: these lines speak of putting out the light. He repeats
this phrase, giving it a different meaning the second time. What does it
mean in each case, and what effect does this have?

Prometheus was a Greek god who was responsible for stealing ﬁre and
giving it to humankind. However, he was punished for this. Try to ﬁnd
out more of the story and see what it suggests about Othello. You may ﬁnd
some irony.

What does the word cunning’st imply about his attitude to Desdemona?
What do we usually associate with ‘cunning’?

I Lines 13—15 use another means of saying the same thing. What is the
metaphor here? What does it tell us about Desdemona, and about Othello’s
attitude to her?

I Lines 16 to the end of the passage: he is kissing her again and again,
ﬁnding it difﬁcult to bring himself to do the deed.

Consider the use of the word Justice. What does it tell us about Othello’s
attitude to what he is doing?

What does Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee /Aha' love
thee after suggest, and how do you respond to this chilling idea?

Lines 20, 21 and 22 contain three oxymorons. What effect does this
linking together of opposite ideas have on your appreciation of Othello’s
state of mind? You may notice that he is more concerned with his own
state of mind than with her as a person.

 

 

Reminder: see oxymoron on
page7in Unit 2.

\Unit 25: Drama passage questions

  

  

I Considering all the evidence you have gained from close reading of the
structure and language of this passage, what comments would you want
to make about the character of Othello as it is revealed here? How does he
see himself? How does he justify his actions? How sympathetic are you to

him? How could changing attitudes to the situation of women affect your
attitudes here?

      
  
   
    
   

 

You have been asked to ‘Write a critical appreciation and consider what
this passage adds to your understanding of the character of Othello’.
You have already analysed the passage and noted some important
features. You could take several of them and expand your commentary
to answer the broad part of the question, as follows:

COMMENT

I his attachment to Desdemona both physically and spiritually (ﬁnd
some quotations which illustrate this)

I his attitude to the ﬁdelity of wives (ﬁnd some evidence of the male
fear of cuckoldry in the play)

I his concern to do what is right (where else do you see this in the play?)

I the poetic nature of his utterance (ﬁnd further examples from the
text to illustrate this).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

At this point in the play, he is fully intent on killing her. How has he 221

got to this point? (Be careful you don’t say too much about Iago; the
question is focused on Othello.)

Again, you have more than enough points to make an excellent
passage-based answer now. You can either ﬁt them in at the end of each
paragraph, or write in more detail about them in the ﬁnal paragraphs of
your main body. (See Unit 28 for more on tackling a passage question.)

Passage question 3: Shakespeare '  3

ACTIVITY 25.5

Read the passage below from Measure for Measure, using close reading
techniques to analyse it and answer the essay question.

Note: The Duke has left the management of the city to his deputy, Angelo, and
disguised himself so that he can observe what is going on. Angelo takes a very
strict attitude to the law, as we have already seen.

Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the following scene, showing its
signiﬁcance to the play as a whole.

Act 2 Scene 3
Enter DUKE [disguised as a FRIAR] and PROVOST.
DUKE: Hail to you, Provost — so I think you are.

PROVOST: I am the Provost. What’s your Will, good friar?Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

a;WWW».lmnmtmnmmm, «

"weng WM. Wm wwtwm. a“. v» swarm:

 

mewmmmmwmmkmmmmwmmmz‘

TIP

Sometimes a scene such

as this with two minor
characters can offer very
useful insight into the play’s
main concerns. The Duke

is not of course a minor
character, but both Juliet
and the Provost are less
important yet they have
positive values to offer to our
understanding ofthe play’s

might be that you think there
isn’t much to say on the scene
and move too quickly into the
play as a whole. Remember,
the first thing you have to

do is attend closely to the

passage!

i
i
3
concerns. The danger here i

.memmwmmawmw’)

DUKE:

PROVOST:

DUKE:

PROVOSTI

DUKE:
JULIET:
DUKE:

JULIET:
DUKE:
JULIET:
DUKE:

JULIET:
DUKE:

JULIET:
DUKE:

JULIET:

DUKE:

JULIET:

PROVOST:

Bound by my charity and my blessed order
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
Enter JULIET
Look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the ﬂaws of her own youth,
Hath blistered her report. She is with child;
And he that got it, sentenced — a young man
More ﬁt to do another such offence
Than die for this.
When must he die? ,
As I do think, tomorrow.
[T0 JULIET] I have provided for you, stay awhile
And you shall be conducted.
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
I do, and bear the shame most patiently.
I’ll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound
Or hollowly put on.
I’ll gladly learn.
Love you the man that wronged you?
Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed.
Mutually.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.
’Tis meet so, daughter, but lest you do repent
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame —
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear —
I do repent me as it is an evil
And take the shame with joy.
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die tomorrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you, Benedicz'te. [Exit]
Must die to-morrow? O, injurious love,
That respites me a life Whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!
’Tis pity of him.
[Exeunt]

 

K

E

20

25

30

35

4O

45COMMENT

Unit 25: Drama passage questions

Play structure

This scene comes between the two great persuasion scenes of Angelo by
Isabella, when he is overcome by strong attraction for her, so it reminds
the audience of Claudio and Juliet — the two lovers who have sinned by
loving each other.

Characterisation

The Provost is a good and kindly man, who is responsible for carrying
out the administration of the prison: as such, he facilitates the plot,

but he is always sympathetic. The Duke in another scene says: there’s
written in your brow  honesty and constancy and his words and actions
throughout the play support this view. I would do more than that, more
were needful shows him to be caring and generous in the execution of
his duty, and later he is most unwilling to put the drunken Abhorson to
death. It is he who thinks of the Ragozine head substitution. His View
here of Claudio’s ‘crime’ is a very sympathetic one — he thinks Claudio
more ﬁtted for fathering another child than being put to death.

Iuliet This is Iuliet’s only speaking scene, and she makes a very good
impression. Remember that she is pregnant and near the time of the
birth, so the audience would be sympathetic to her. Look at her lines
21, 25, 38/9. They show that she is repentant of her ‘sin’ and willing to
learn. Now see what she says of her relationship with Claudio in lines
27 and 30. She loves him and he loves her: I do repent me as it is an
evil, / And take the shame with joy. She agrees that it was wrong to have
a sexual relationship before proper marriage but she is happy at the
outcome. However, she is only told at the end of the scene that Claudio
is condemned to death, and she is naturally very upset at this. Her
sincerity and dignity in this scene are striking.

The Duke is the most complex character in the play, spending much of
it in the disguise of a friar, manipulating the plot, hiding so that he can
eavesdrop on other characters, and stage managing a happy ending. It
is he who arranges the bed trick plot (see page 92). Here his words are
appropriate ones for the persona of a holy man, though his ﬁnal lines
lack warmth:

Yourpartner, as I hear, must die to—morrow,
AndI am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you! Benedicite!

He is ‘going through the motions’ as a friar, but of course he is aware
that he can manipulate the outcome — this is all part of his testing

of Angelo. The Duke is not a particularly naturalistic character and
deciding your views of his role and function in this play are a key aspect
if you are studying it. His machinations enable the plot of the play to be
satisﬁed, but his behaviour is not that of a ‘real’ person. In particular, he
draws out the suﬂering of many innocent characters — this is one of the
reasons the play is called a ‘problem play’. You can give examples of this
here, but don’t allow them to take over the essay.

223Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Language

The most striking feature of the language here is tone — the Duke uses
the typical language and tone of the priest, while Juliet, in contrast,
speaks naturally and with sincerity, using balanced antithetical
phrasing.

Themes

This is a play about sexual behaviour and people’s attitudes to it. We
are shown extreme examples: at one end of the scale are the low life
characters — the bawds and prostitutes whose behaviour has lately not
been very well regulated; at the other end of the scale is the puritanical
Angelo, who claims to be Virtuous and is prepared to condemn a young
awwamw man to death for having sex with his wife—to—be. Some students ﬁnd
TIP Isabella’s self-righteous devotion to her own chastity over her brother’s
life not a very endearing characteristic, either. The placing of this scene

Shakespeare’s ‘problem .
plays, such as Measure for in the structure of the play between the two great scenes of Angelo

 

a v-um r: mmuﬂm

Measure are also referred g and Isabella draws attention to the way that Claudio and Juliet love
to as dark comedies, as, each other in a natural way. There are no manipulations here, no bed
although they end 0” a tricks, just a loving young couple whose baby is about to be born. This

reasonably happy nOt?’ some is natural, central human experience and the cruel ending of the scene
of the more profound Issues

raised have not really been reminds us that there is a way to go before any kind of ‘happy ending’
resolved can be arranged and the play satisfy the conventions of ‘comedy’.

ACTIVITY 25.6

Write an essay on this passage from Othello using the headings in the
Comment box on pages 222—3.

Note: Iago has persuaded the wealthy Roderigo, who earlier made an
unsuccessful bid for Desdemona’s hand, that he should wake Brabantio,
Desdemona’s father, and tell him she has secretly married Othello, a black
African army general. This is the end of a very lengthy scene in which
Brabantio has appealed to the Duke and Senate about the marriage, but
both Othello and Desdemona have defended their love for each other and
subsequent elopement.

Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the following scene, discussing
what it contributes to your understanding ofthe play as a whole.

%
2
g
E
t
i
t
i

I ‘mwummnwmm

RODERIGO: Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, ifI depend on
the issue?

IAGO: Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told
thee often, and I retell thee again and again, I
hate the Moor. My cause is hearted: thine hath no 5
less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge
against him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost
thyself a pleasure, me a sport. There are many
events in the womb of time which Will be delivered.
Traverse. Go; provide thy money. We will have more 10
of this to-morrow. Adieu.

\Unit 25: Drama passage questions

 

RODERIGO: Where shall we meet i’th’ morning? l

IAGO: At my lodging.

RODERIGO: I’ll be with thee betimes.

IAGO: Go to; farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo? 15

RODERIGO: What say you?

IAGO: No more of drowning, do you hear?

RODERIGO: I am changed. J
IAGO: Go to; farewell. Put money enough in your purse.

RODERIGO: I’ll sell all my land. [Exit RODERIGO] 20

IAGO: Thus do I ever make my fool my purse;

For I mine own gain’d knowledge should profane

If I would time expend with such a snipe

But for my sport and proﬁt. I hate the Moor,

And it is thought abroad, that ’twixt my sheets 25

He’s done my ofﬁce: I know not if ’t be true l
Yet I, for mere suspicion in that kind,

Will do as if for surety. He holds me well:

The better shall my purpose work on him.

Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now; 30

To get his place and to plume up my will ‘
In double knavery. How, how? Let’s see. I ’
After some time, to abuse Othello’s ear I
That he is too familiar with his wife;

He hath a person and a smooth dispose 35
To be suspected, framed to make women false.

The Moor is of a free and open nature,

That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,

And will as tenderly be led by the nose

As asses are. 40
I have’t.It is engendered. Hell and night

Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light.

225

Shakespeare Othello Act 1 Scene 3

In the following response, I am going to mark in bold those elements which relate

to the rest of the play, showing knowledge and understanding beyond the passage. l
The essay exempliﬁes the skilful incorporation of wider comments while analysing

the passage closely. We are never in doubt that the writer knows the play well.

 

This is a very significant scene, coming as it does at the end of a public
display of Othello’s and Desdemona’s affection for each other, as well as
confirmation from the Duke and Senate of Othello’s pride, reputation and l
status as a general. The scene gradually narrows down from the busy, formal,
public scene to a dialogue between Iago and Roderigo, and finally a soliloquy
— lago’s first in the play, and one in which he is apparently open about his
motives and his view of other characters.

Roderigo is wealthy and not very perceptive. He has been fooled by Iago
and keeps asking for reassurance, as we see in the first line Wilt thou be fast
to my hopes  ? He seems very dependent on Iago and has been threatening
earlier in the dialogue to kill himself because of his unrequited love forCambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 25.7

Take one of your own
passage essays and
underline the comments in
it which relate to the rest

of the play. Is your essay

a convincing analysis of

the passage as well as a
wider comment? If you’ve
underlined almost the whole
essay, you are not giving
enough attention to the
printed passage, and if there
are hardly any underlinings,
you haven’t incorporated
wider reference.

 

Desdemona. We don’t take him very seriously and the short dialogue in lines
12—18 seems enough to reassure him that he should find more money and
stop threatening to drown himself. His role in the play is never dominant; he
is used and abused by Iago throughout and dies in Act 5, attacking Cassio
without very good reason, urged on by Iago: ’Tis but a man gone: forth my
sword, he dies. He remains a shallow character throughout, though as a
minor character he has the function of paralleling Othello in his gullibility
and reinforcing our impression of Iago’s persuasiveness.

Iago’s soliloquy begins with some very dismissive comments about
Roderigo. He is a fool; a snipe, whom Iago would not bother with except for
sport andprofit. But he is wealthy and easily led and Iago takes advantage of
this. Iago is perceptive about the characters of others too: he thinks Othello is
ofa free and open nature and thus easily fooled; Cassio is handsome, a proper
man, the sort of man framed to make women false.

In this first soliloquy, and in the earlier persuasion to Roderigo, we get a
sense of Iago’s motives for his hatred of Othello. He says my cause is hearted
— full of vitality ~ and he cites simple hate. He says he may be a cuckold:
people think Othello has been to bed with his wife: he’s done my office. Fear
of cuckoldry is a major theme in many of Shakespeare’s plays, so we could
take this seriously. We have already seen that he feels slighted because
Cassio, a great arithmetician and not a good soldier (mere prattle without
practice) has been promoted over him. His is the resentment felt by all who
have been passed over for promotion by someone whom they consider
has lesser qualities than themselves. Perhaps he is envious of Cassio’s

We have also seen his racism from the very beginning ofthe play — his
crude physical descriptions to Brabantio: an old black ram / Is tupping your
white ewe, for example. All in all, there is enough here to explain his hatred.
But interestingly, his plan against Othello is not yet fully formed. In the final
lines, he says it is engender’d or conceived. It will take time before the birth

of the plan comes to pass. He has already said to Roderigo: There are many/
events in the womb of time which will be delivered. Here he calls it a monstrous
birth which will depend on Hell and night to bring it out. These metaphors of
conception and birth are a travesty of what new life normally brings and show
his twisted, bitter nature.

The language of this extract is revealing in other ways too. First of all,
there are a number of repetitions in Iago’s prose speech to Roderigo, mostly
concerned with his money. He also tells Roderigo what to do, in contrast with
which Roderigo asks many questions, for reassurance. The extract moves
from prose to verse, as Iago begins his soliloquy. There is more emotional
intensity now that he is on his own, reflecting and scheming, and his
utterance is expressed in blank verse. The short line As asses are suggests a
pause for thought before the final couplet, ending the scene and the act with
a rhyme on night and light: enhancing the sense that the play has good and
evil as a theme. Iago is thinking as he speaks: he says Let me see (Let’s see)
twice, and How, how?; finally, he says / ha’t— it is engender’d: his plan has been
conceived and time will develop it.

One of the most obvious themes here is Iago’sjealousy. We know that he
will later use Othello’sjealousy to lead him on, but he himself is obviously
envious of Cassio’s good looks and fears his wife had been to bed with
Othello. Over the centuries, critics have debated whether Iago has a motive
or not. For example, critic Samuel Taylor Coleridge called him a motive/ess
malignity. However, this soliloquy, ending Act 1, prepares the audience for hisUnit 25: Drama passage questions

  
     

 
  
   
 

willingness to do anything to take revenge on Othello and Cassio in double
knavery. His persuasion of Roderigo is proleptic of his tragic persuasions of
Othello later on. We cannot help feeling that intelligence and determination
used for such villainous purposes will have a tragic outcome. Othello does
indeed believe him and is taken in relatively easily. Only at the very end of
the play after the death of the innocent Desdemona is the truth revealed.

ACTIVITY 25.8

Write the following essay on the passage from Death of a Salesman by Arthur
Miller.

Essay question: Write a critical appreciation of this passage, relating it to
Miller’s methods and eﬁects in the play as a whole.

   
 
  
  

TIP
Context: comparisons with
any of Shakespeare’s other
tragic heroes could be

illuminating.

   
  
  

      

 

WILLY: [Driving] So tell me, he gave you a warm welcome?
HAPPY: Sure, Pop, sure!

BIFF: [driven] Well, it was kind of—

WILLY: I was wondering if he’d remember you. [To Happy]

Imagine, man doesn’t see him for ten, twelve years and
gives him that kind of welcome! I

HAPPY: Damn right!

BIFF: [trying to return to the oﬂensive] Pop, look —

WILLY: You know why he remembered you, don’t you? Because 227
you impressed him in those days.

BIFF: Let’s talk quietly and get this down to the facts, huh?

WILLY: [as though Biﬁ had been interrupting] Well, what

happened? It’s great news, Biff. Did he take you into his
ofﬁce or’d you talk in the waiting—room?

BIFF: Well, he came in, see, and —
WILLY: [with a big smile] What’d he say? Betcha he threw his arm
around you.
BIFF: Well, he kinda—
WILLY: He’s a ﬁne man. [To Happy] Very hard man to see, y’know.
HAPPY: [agreeing] Oh, I know.
WILLY: [to Biﬁ‘] Is that where you had the drinks? I
BIFF: Yeah, he gave me a couple of —no, no!
HAPPY: [cutting in] He told him my Florida idea.
WILLY: Don’t interrupt. [T0 Biﬂ] How’d he react to the Florida
idea?
BIFF: Dad, will you give me a minute to explain?
WILLY: I’ve been waiting for you to explain since I sat down here!
What happened? He took you into his ofﬁce and What? I
BIFF: Well — Italked. And—he listened, see.
WILLY: Famous for the way he listens, y’know. What was his
answer?
BIFF: His answer was—[he breaks 01f suddenly angry]. Dad,
you’re not letting me tell you What I want to tell you!
WILLY: [accusing angered] You didn’t see him, did you?

BIFF: I did see him!Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

WILLY: What’d you insult him or something? You insulted him,
didn’t you?

BIFF: Listen, Will you let me out of it, Will you just let me out of
it!

HAPPY: What the hell!

WILLY: Tell me What happened!

BIFF: [To Happy] I can’t talk to him!

A single trumpet note jars the air. Yhe light of green leaves stains the house)
which holds the air ofnight and ofa dream. Young Bernard enters and
knocks on the door ofthe house.

YOUNG
BERNARD: Lﬁantieally] Mrs Loman, Mrs Loman!
HAPPY: TeHluniudmthappened!

BIFF: [T0 Happy] Shut up and leave me alone!
“HLLY: No,no!Youhadtogoandﬂunknnuh!
BIFF: What math? What’re you talking about?
YOUNG

BERNARD: Mrs Loman, Mrs Loman!
Linda appears in the house, as ofold

WILLY: [wildly] Math, math, math!
BIFF: Take it easy, Pop!
YOUNG
BERNARD: Mrs Lomanl
a WILLY: [furiously] If you hadn’t ﬂunked, you’d’ve been set by
now.

Arthur Miller Death ofa Salesman (1949)

 

 

 

Note: This passage is part ofthe restaurant scene, which is near the climax of
the play. Biff has told Happy what happened when he went to see Oliver for a
job and is determined to try to have it all out with his father. His attempts are

thwarted ~ Willy doesn’t listen and tells the boys he has been fired before this
sequence begins.

The structure of this extract is a gradual build-up to Biff’s trying to talk
honestly to his father and his frustration and anger when he fails to do so. The
end of the sequence is one of Willy’s memories intruding, a memory of Biff’s
failure to pass his maths at school, to which Willy attributes all Biff’s failures,
desperately trying to convince himself that it was not caused by the hotel
trauma with the ‘other woman’.

The dialogue follows a pattern which by now is familiar to the audience.
Biff is trying hard to take the initiative, but is beaten down by Willy. Miller’s
stage directions at the beginning of the extract shows that Willy is driving
and Biff is immediately disadvantaged: driven. Throughout the first part
of the extract Biff’s sentences are incomplete: Well it was kind of—; Pop, look—;

 

 

builds incrementally on his own exaggerations, as can be seen in his second
speech: / was wondering if he’d remember you. (To Happy) Imagine, man
doesn’t see him for ten, twelve years and gives him that kind of welcome!
(First, he probably wouldn’t remember him, then it’s ten years, then it’sUnit 25: Drama passage questions

 

l I ‘
twelve years, then it’s gives him that kind of welcome.) This is typical of the

alternative idealised reality Willy creates about himself and the boys through
the play. As Biff tries at last to explain, Willy makes the assumption that Biff
has somehow insulted Oliver and their communication breaks down. Biff says
to his brother: Ican’t talk to him./ Interestingly, when Willy asks if he had a
couple of drinks with Oliver there is a moment where Biff seems to be drawn ,
back into the old bravado, and talking up of every situation when he says i1,
Yeah, he gave me a couple of— before regaining his sense of purpose and
saying no, no!

Happy’s responses throughout this sequence are typical of him — he goes
along with everything his father says and just makes affirmative comments:
Sure, Pop, sure; Damn right; Oh, [know He is not strongenough to help Biff
to explain anything to his father: his own immaturity and illusions about
himself and his capabilities are suggested in the one line about his Florida ‘
idea, Florida: the symbol of the promised land through the play. it is, however, ’
a chilling moment when Happy rejects his father and claims not to know him a
little later in this scene. (No that’s not my father. He’sjust a guy.)

Willy is so determined to believe his own fantasy about Biff’s capabilities
that he rides over Biff’s attempts to communicate, imagining his own view of
Oliver and what he would like Oliver to have behaved like. At first, his wishful
thinking dominates the conversation:  he gave you a warm welcome?;
Imagine, man doesn’t see him for ten, twelve years and gives him that kind of
welcome!; Because you impressed him in those days; Betcha he threw his arm I
aroundyou. It is no wonder Biff cannot communicate with him, faced with
this barrage of determinedly positive comments. Although this is a very
naturalistic conversation, there are two ironic moments in Willy’s comments 229
on Oliver: Very hard man to see, y’know. Willy has no personal experience of

I this, but has to believe that a man in Oliver’s position must be like that. We
can also see the irony that this applies metaphorically to Willy himself; equally
ironic is: Famous for the way he listens, y’know. Willy also wants to believe this, l
but it, too, is highly ironic because Willy himself hasn’t listened to Biff at all. it ‘
is at that point that Biff comes in angrily with Dad, you’re not letting me tel/you
whatl want to tellyou! When it all goes wrong, Willy’s angry assumption is that
it was all Biff’s fault and that he has somehow insulted Oliver. Neither of his
extreme positions is the right one. His fantasy about Biff being welcomed is as
invalid as his fantasy that it all went wrong because of Biff’s insulting Oliver.
The truth is that Oliver didn’t remember Biff, and why should he? Biff was
never his salesman and left under a cloud because of the missing basketballs I
years before, whatever story Willy has built up in his own mind, and Biff
had to wait for six hours before he managed to see Oliver fora minute. Biff’s
desperate words: willyou let me out ofit, willyoujust let me out ofitl seem to
refer to Willy’s designated role for Biff, which has tragically limited both of
them all their lives. The critic Susan Abbotson claims that Willy’s apparent
ordinariness should not blind us to his tragic stature, but Biff too has some |

 

claim to a tragic role in the play.

Willy’s memory then cuts into the scene and the final moments interweave
the old memory of Bernard coming with the news that Biff failed maths and
the two sons anxiously trying to understand in the present what their father
is talking about. (Bernard and Charley are used in juxtaposition to contrast
the Lomans throughout the play — realists rather than dreamers, sensible
and hardworking.) Miller’s use of the memory technique runs through the
play and creates a kind of stream of consciousness effect. Willy’s present
conversations are underpinned by his memories of earlier events andCambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

concerns. A little after the printed sequence, the climactic moment where
the younger Biff comes into the hotel room where Willy has been in bed with
a woman is played out in Willy’s memory; the audience see the roots of his
disillusionment with his father and Willy’s guilty despair.

All three men are trying to escape from an unworkable life—model imposed
on them: Happy, with his unrealistic dreams of Florida, from grinding tedium
and meaningless relationships; Biff moving to the country but still with a
sense of his own failure to grow up; and most of all Willy, self~deluding to the
last, clinging to his ideas about business and capitalism even though he is
really a nature lover and a happy man With a batch ofcement, not a successful
salesman. His ambiguous feelings about Biff come through in this scene as
they do throughout the play: that Biff is fine and heroic; orthat Biff has ruined
his life because of failing maths; or, underlying it all — but not able to be
admitted fully — that Willy is actually partly to blame because he has failed to
live up to his own projected image to his sons of what a decent man is.

k J

 

 

 

 

a,mwammamrAWWwwmmymtwm  a

 TIP

: Context: l have included this
play not only because it is
very popular on syllabuses
and in coursework, but
because many students
write about the failure ofthe
 American Dream (the chance
‘L offreedom,opportunityand
wealth) which they see in it.
Valid though this is, i hope
that looking closely at the
dialogue in this passage will
remind you of what a master
craftsman ofthe family
drama Miller is, a quality seen
in many of his other plays too.

 

Arthur Miller.

As with the previous sample essay, it is clear that the play as a whole is very
well known and the response shows insight into Miller’s writing of this scene.
On a copy of the passage, underline those passages which relate to parts of the
play other than this scene.

 

«a m-mervvnwmw’ﬁA