Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Unit 15: Characters in drama

The characters in a play, whether by Shakespeare or Miller, Soyinka or Herzog,
Bolt or Churchill, are often very memorable; it is not surprising that students relate
immediately to them, especially if they have seen the play on stage or in a ﬁlm
version. As in the novel, the people who inhabit the action can be the natural focus
of any reader or audience when they ﬁrst encounter that work.

i.

’s

 

TIP

i
Many exam questions focus 
on character, so you need 2
to be well prepared forthis 
topic. However, atAS orfirst g

t
i
5

Created in words
Characters in a play are not real people; they are created ﬁrst and foremost by
language and imagery. But because actors interpret them, they seem real to a
you will need to direct your reader or audience, and you are bound to respond to them with feeling. It’s just
‘ material carefully to that. important to make sure that you can identify the reasons for your interpretation or
"amwwmwmmwmmmmw your powerful response by quoting the words and images that have inﬂuenced you,
especially if you are answering a passage question or an essay on characterisation.
The word characterisation means ‘making a character’, and it reminds you that the
W writer has chosen words and tones to create a particular effect. What impressions
Characterisation see Cléfll'llthl’l are created of the characters described here, and of the people describing them?
on this page andln unit 10- . Sometimes they are describing themselves.

g year level questions will not
simplyaskfordescriptionsof
3 characters; there will always
g beaparticularfocusand
t
i
i
a;

 
 
  
   
  
  
     
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
   
   
  
  
    
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
  

Impression created

  
  
  
  
  
  
 

1 I’ll get him a job selling. He could be big
in no time. My God! Remember how they
used to follow him around in high school?
When he smiled at one of them their faces
lit up. When he walked down the street...
[he loses himself in reminiscences].

Willy’s description of Biff at school in
1 shows more about Willy than it does
about Biff perhaps: his love for his son
and desire for him to do well make him
unrealistic, as many parents are, about
wanting their children to do the things
they have done, or in this case not done.

  

Willy about Biff in Death ofa Salesman

 

   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

Mr Myalatya in 2 calls himself a monster
for keeping a sense of hope which drives
him, but at this point neither he nor

the audience believe what he says here
criticising himself. Sadly, his idealism
and hope are to prove tragic in the South
African context of the play.

The truth is that I am worse than Nero
feeding Christians to the lions. / feed young
people to my Hope. Every young body
behind a school desk keeps it alive. So
you’ve been warned! if you see a hungry
gleam in my eyes when I look at your
children ... you know what it means. That
is the monster thatstands here before you.

Anela Myalatya of himself in My Children!
MyAfrica!

0, she doth teach the torches to burn
bright!

  
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
  
 

   
 
   

Romeo’s passion as well as Juliet’s
beauty are expressed in the imagery and
tone here.

  

Romeo of Juliet in Romeo and Juliet
Act 1 Scene 5

 
  
  
   
    
  

  
   
  
    
 
 

 
  
  
    
 

... how lovely and sweet and pretty she
is  in the eyes ofothers — strangers

— she’s terribly shy and lives in a world
of her own and those things make her
seem a little peculiar.

Amanda describes her daughter
with characteristic exaggeration and
optimism. Tom loves his sister no less,
but is much more realistic about her
personality.

 

Amanda and Tom of Laura in The Glass
Menagerielte

18

Look closely and critically

at what characters say of
themselves, and what they
Say about each other, in the
play you are studying. What
effect does this have in the
overall structure of the play?

 

Richard lll’s determination to prove a
villain does show his evil nature, but it
also shows his love of play—acting and
self—conscious assuming of roles for
himself.

5 lam determined to prove a villain 

Richard ill of himself in Richard /II
Act 1 Scene 1

This shows the relationship of the

‘ Macbeths and their relative toughness,
though later she is shown to be not as
hard—hearted as she boasts here, and her
unconscious mind rebels against her, as
you see vividly in the sleepwalking scene.

‘ 6 yet do lifear thy nature;
It is too full 0’ th’milk ofhuman kindness . ..

Lady Macbeth of Macbeth in Macbeth
Act 1 Scene 5

There are few stage directions in a Shakespeare play. But those that do exist,
together with the words given to each character, contain enough clues for the
director or the attentive reader to visualise the actions and gestures that the
characters will perform. Actions speak louder than words, as the old saying has it,
and certainly, in Shakespeare’s Othello, the way Iago behaves towards Othello gives
us a very different View from the hypocritical words he speaks to him with apparent
sincerity. Other dramatists give quite full stage directions, even describing the
appearance and manner of the characters when they ﬁrst appear. George Bernard
Shaw, for example, often gives very lengthy descriptions of characters, more in
the manner of a novelist. In Death of a Salesman, Arthur Miller gives description
as well as commentary on the action, and many hints about tone and emotional
quality for the actors playing the parts.

Television, in particular, has made audiences used to very naturalistic acting;
in the theatre, stronger projection and more exaggerated gestures and actions are
necessary to communicate to the whole audience, even those in the back rows of
the theatre.

 

Hand gestures work well in the theatre (Romeo and Juliet, National Theatre, London, 2013).

me.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

W Acnvrrv15.2

Stage business is activity with
props (properties) such as the
objects used here, which are
employed for extra dramatic
impact (notes, letters, cleaning
materials, length of rubber hose).

Extract 1

(Jane thinks that Eva is trying to clean the oven,
when in fact Eva is trying to commit suicide in
various ways, including putting her head in the gas
oven.)
JANE: It’s at times like this you’re glad of your
friends, aren’t you? [She goes at the

oven with ﬁesh vigour, singing cheerily]
[During the above Eva writes another
brief note and places it in a prominent
position on the table. She now rises and
goes to a chair where there is a plastic
washing basketﬁlled with clean but
unironed clothes. Coiled on top is a
washing line. She returns to the table.
jane, emerging for fresh water, catches
sight of her]

Sorting out your laundry? You’re a
terror, aren’t you? You’re worse than me.
[She returns to her oven and resumes her
song]

[Eva begins topull the washing linefrom
the basket. Sheﬁnds one end and ties it in
a crude noose. She tests the eﬂectiveness
of this on one wrist and, satisﬁed, pulls
the rest of the rope ﬁom the basket. Every
foot or so is aplastic clothespeg which she
removes]

I think I’m beginning to win through.

I think I’m down to the metal anyway,
that’s something. There’s about eight
layers on here.

[Eva comes across a pair of knickers and
two pairs of socks still pegged to the line.
She removes these and replaces them in
the basket]

There’s something stuck on the bottom
here like cement. You haven’t had

Extract 2
LINDA:
WILLY:

LINDAZ

WILLYZ

LINDA:

WILLYZ

LINDA:

Look at the use of stage directions in the following sequences. How are they
used to complement the words to create effects of character and theme? You
can use the term stage business.

cement for dinner lately, have you? [She
laughs]

[Eva now stands with her clothes line
staring at the ceiling ...]

Alan Ayckbourn Absurd Person Singular (1972)

Just rest. Should I sing to you?

Yeah. Sing to me. [Linda hums a soﬁ‘
lullaby] When that team came out —- he
was the tallest, remember?

Oh yes. And in gold.

[Biﬂ enters the darkened kitchen, takes a
cigarette and leaves the house. He comes
downstage into agoldenpool oflight. He
smokes, staring at the night]

Like a young god, Hercules — something
like that. And the sun, the sun all
around him. Remember how he waved
to me? Right up from the ﬁeld with

the representatives of three colleges
standing by? And the buyers I brought,
and the cheers when he came out —
Loman, Loman, Loman! God Almighty,
he’ll be great yet. A star like that,
magniﬁcent, can never really fade away!
[The light on Willy isfading. The gas
heater begins to glow through the kitchen
wall, near the stairs, a blueﬂame
beneath red coils.]

[timidly] Willy, dear, what has he got
against you?

I’m so tired. Don’t talk any more

[Biﬂ slowly returns to the kitchen. He
stops, stares towards the heater]

Will you ask Howard to let you work in
New York?

 

 

:ui.‘_.a....‘ ‘ r..ch ..vA . .Unit 15: Characters in drama

 

 

WILLy; First thing in the morning. WILLY: [staring through the window into the
Everything’ll be all right. moonlight] Gee, look at the moon
[Bzﬁ reaches behind the heater and moving between the buildings!
draws out a length of rubber tubing. He [Biﬁ‘ wraps the tubing round his hand
is horriﬁed and turns his head toward and quickly goes up the stairs]

Willy’s room, still dimly lit, from which
the strains of Linda’s desperate but
monotonous humming rise]

Arthur Miller Death ofa Salesman (1949)

 

1 The contrast between the action of the two speakers is remarkable
— one trying to kill herself and the other doing domestic chores. The
misunderstanding is extremely comic for the audience, with Eva looking
for new ways to kill herself using what is in the kitchen (drink, sleeping
pills, oven, washing line, later electric wires) and Jane seeing each of Eva’s
actions as an indication of a housewifely desire to tidy up. Jane is the only
person to speak here, and she is completely oblivious to the evidence in
front of her, imagining that Eva is like her, an obsessive housewife. Her
vigorous and cheerful demeanour is in complete contrast to the suicidal
Eva, who is beginning, in any case, to feel the effect of having taken
sleeping pills. Although the audience laugh at this sequence, there are
some serious points being made: how often do we misinterpret others’
actions because of our own obsessions? What does compulsive tidiness 10.,
reveal about character? Are not the everyday objects which surround us all
deadening in their own way?

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

2 The stage directions here at the end ofAct 1 show Biff discovering
Willy’s suicide apparatus and counterpoint (a term from music which is

W sometimes used in place of ‘juxtapose’). Willy’s nostalgic and hyperbolic
reminiscences of him as a youthful sportsman — like oyoung god, Hercules. ‘
Take a scene from a play Miller makes the gas fire very prominent in his stage directions, even ;

stressing the colours of red and blue (a little like the phone box in Miller’s
A View from the Bridge), alerting the audience to its significance. The use
of the stage space and the lighting here, to show both Biff and his parents
separately, reminds us of the way in which the theatre has effects of ironic
juxtaposition that cannot easily be replicated in filmed versions of the
play. Linda’s desperate humming and timid question to Willy maintain our
awareness of her anxiety about him, and her ignorance of his affair with

you are studying and note
the stage directions. ’lhen
look at the dialogue and
consider what prompts it
offers to the action. How
does this action illuminate

.the CharaCterisaﬁOn (and the other woman, the discovery of which, depicted later in the play, is so
Indeed the themes) in the important in the fractured relationship between him and his son. Willy’s
Scene? How might another love of the moonlight and its beauty is a reminder of his affinity with
stUdent interpret the scene the natural world and the play’s concern with the contrast of town and
differently? country life.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

TIP

Although you can make
reference to typical character

traits, it is always helpful
to show that you recognise
complexity ofcharacter
where it is presented in the
plays you are studying.

 

 

Character types

In his plays, Shakespeare makes frequent reference to the four humours: well—
established means of delineating personality types at the time he was writing. The
four types — melancholic, phlegmatic, choleric and sanguine — are based essentially
on the four elements of water, earth, ﬁre and air, and their dominant characteristics
are, respectively: depression, stolid calm, anger and optimism. References to them
recur throughout the plays. Greek tragedies and Roman comedies are full of
characters dominated by one ruling passion or quality. Ben Jonson’s plays, such as
Volpone and The Alchemist, create characters who are types in this way, and their
names often give the clue to their personalities: Subtle, Justice Overdo, Sir Epicure
Mammon, and so on. In many Restoration comedies, a similar effect is created: Lord
Foppington, Sir Fopling Flutter, Lady Fainall, Aimwell and Archer, for example.
There is more on stock characters on pages 235—40 in Unit 26 of this book.

Chorus figures

A chorus is a character or group of characters who help to tell the story of the
play, and sometimes act in it as well. Chorus ﬁgures have been used from the very
earliest Greek drama, and are still used today. The chorus makes the audience
aware of the context and meaning of the play, and can represent the audience’s
point of View. Taken together, the characters of the chorus can provide a powerful
communal appeal. Here are some examples:

I In Oedipus Rex by Sophocles, the Chorus represent a commonsense View of the
tragedy.

I T. S. Eliot uses a chorus of women to represent the ordinary parishioners of
Canterbury at the time of the martyrdom of Thomas a Becket in Murder in the
Cathedral. g

I Ama Ata Aidoo uses chorus ﬁgures — the Old Man and Old Woman — in
Anowa.

I Other examples of individual chorus ﬁgures are: The Common Man in A Man
for All Seasons (Bolt), Michael in Dancing at Laghnasa (Friel), the Praise-singer
in Death and the King’s Horseman (Soyinka) and Time in The Winter’s Tale
(Shakespeare).

Motivation

Why do characters do what they do? Their behaviour should be generally
believable, and arise out of the situations they ﬁnd themselves in. Audiences tend
to accept the status quo at the beginning of the play, even if it is rather unusual,
and then expect believable behaviour after that. On the whole, there are plenty of
plausible reasons for characters’ behaviour suggested within the text. In Othello,
a character whose motives are discussed endlessly is Iago. Is he a ‘motiveless’
character who is just evil, as some have claimed, or is he fuelled by envy of Cassio
or Othello, racism, revenge at being passed over for promotion, anger because
Othello has had sex with his wife, and so on? Your interpretation must take account
of those clues in the text that you think are important, and you must be able to
quote them. In Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? by Edward Albee, George and
Martha are cruel to each other, but their complicated games are fuelled by their
inability to have a child and the elaborate fantasy they have created, a fact not
revealed until the end of the play.Unit 15: Characters in drama

 

Is there a difference between what characters say about themselves and what
you, the audience or reader, observe? There may be irony if the character is not fully
aware of their motives. In Arthur Miller’s A View from the Bridge, Eddie is not able
to face the nature of his love for his niece Catherine, and feels tortured when his
wife forces him to face up to it near the play’s climax. Shakespeare’s King Lear, for
example, is not very self—aware: he hath ever but slenderly known himself, says one of
his own daughters. In Much Ado About Nothing, Benedick and Beatrice are the last
to realise the powerful attraction they feel for each other.

- If Possible, discuss with a
.he roup the motivation of
[all  tghe characters in the play
on are all studying. You
3m I will ﬁnd a great variety of

' ’ Opinions
as  ’1, o o
ir  Conflict and persuasron
{e 7 It is often said that drama comes from characters in conﬂict, and this is certainly a
0

valid point. Characters will often argue and try to persuade one another, and this
may be a kind of suppressed conﬂict.

 

TIP
Make sure that you support I
your interpretations of
character by close reference
to the text. Many different
7? interpretations are valid,
I because the approach of
-. Shakespeare and other
11 playwrights allows for I
different emphasis and
perspective. ‘

The conﬂict between Thomas More and Henry VIII in A Man for All Seasons
runs through the play, although there is only one early scene in which the two
appear together. It is the many henchmen representing the desires of Henry who
have the overt conﬂicts with More.
I The long scene between Marlene and Joyce at the end of Top Girls is a furious
personal and political argument, and its aftermath ends the play.
The row that erupts between Tom and Amanda after Iim leaves the apartment in
The Glass Menagerie is the fatal one that sends Tom off into the world away from
the family.
The argument between Macbeth and Lady Macbeth in which she accuses him of
being weak and unmanly pushes him into the murder of Duncan.

I The many arguments between the lovers in A Midsummer Night’s Dream are a
e 1 source of both laughter and reﬂection.

1e: _ . I

However, in the relationships between characters depicted by Shakespeare, one of
the most enduring images is of persuasion: one character whispering into another’s
ear, or ﬂattering another to win a point, or speaking seductively to win a lady’s
hand. Here are some examples:

ACTIVITY 15.5

I Iago pouring poisonous lies into Othello’s ear (Othello)
I Richard Duke of Gloucester wooing Lady Anne (Richard III)

I Lady Macbeth urging Macbeth to murder the king (Macbeth).

ACTIVITY 15.6

Find some persuasion scenes in the plays you know, and read or act them
with a partner, if possible. What do they add to your appreciation of the
playwright’s characterisation? How successfully does one character persuade
the other?

 

109Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

ACTIVITY 15.7

Find some paired characters
and consider how far they
are opposite to each other.
Do you ﬁnd any similarities
between them?

! TIP g

Try to pinpoint the evidence
E in the text which supports
your view ofa character,
i using briefquotation where
5 you can, and remember:
2“ the more complex the
3 characterisation, the more
i likely it is that there will

be differing opinions and
g interpretations.
a

\
wimmmWWMWW/V.memmwj

   
   
  

 

Parallels and contrasts of character

As we’ve seen, one of the most signiﬁcant structural devices used by playwrightS

is the juxtaposition of elements to em

characters are no exception. Sometimes a play’s very framework is dependent upoll

phasise and clarify their qualities, and

opposing, or apparently opposing, characters who are often, though not always)
from the same family. Consider the following:

I the sisters Marlene and Joyce in Top Girls: opposites who articulate between
them many of the issues faced by women today

I the brothers Biif and Happy in Death of a Salesman, one much more complex ,

and tortured than the other

I Edgar and Edmund in King Lear: the two sons of Gloucester, one a heroic
knight, even a Christ ﬁgure, the other a Villain

l Eva and Jane, two very different w

Sometimes, two paired, opposing cha

ives in Absurd Person Singular.

racters can be representative not only of

different forms of personality, but of opposing methods of government, even the
succession of one epoch to another. For example, Richard II and Bolingbroke in
Richard II represent respectively the medieval and the new era which heralds the

Tudors; Marlene in Top Girls is a Thatcherite but Joyce is a socialist.

 

TIP

You will remember that one of drama
by appearances. it is always sensible

a ‘good’ character who is unpleasant
sympathy for villains too.

   

Sympathy and identification

 
 
   

’5 great themes is that one should notjudge
to reflect on characters and whether they

can be summed up as simply ‘good’ or ‘bad’. Usually you will find some aspect of

or unappealing, and you will even feel some

Unless the production is a very poor one, everyone who watches a play will ﬁnd
themselves involved in the unfolding situation and identifying with some of

the characters and the crises they face
Shakespeare’s characters, such as Viol

. Sympathy is only to be expected with
a from Twelfth Night and Ophelia from

Hamlet, Orlando from As You Like It or Claudio from Measure for Measure. But
do you always sympathise with Hamlet? (You could even harbour a sneaking
sympathy for Claudius!) Or King Lear? What about Shylock? What is it about

Richard III or Edmund (in King Lear)

that fascinates and entertains even though

they are such Villains? Is there anything good to be said about Iago? Why do
you have such mixed feelings about Caliban in The Tempest? What about the old

fantastical Duke ofdark corners in Me

asure for Measure? Which of the sisters do