Unit 11: Timed prose essays, critical and passage type

 

unit 11: Timed prose essays, critical and
 passage type

As with poetry essays, for each set text that you study, there may be two alternative
questions: one is an essay on an aspect of the novel or short story anthology, such as
characterisation or main concerns; the other is an extract from the work, which you
have to analyse in detail — a passage question essay.

  

Prose analysis

In this part of the unit, you are going to work on the skills of prose analysis so that
you feel conﬁdent about tackling the passage questions on your novel and any other
prose work that you study in the future. Many of the lessons learned in analysis of
poetry are just as useful here. You will ﬁnd further reminders in Section 3 of this

book.

   

‘ "”“”""‘?""R"V§~“"‘*€w%rumw. ..

Points in common with poetry

A You will be familiar with the work, whether poem or passage of prose, because
you have studied the set text. So you are able to establish the subject, situation and
background straight away.

m... .

~ my» 

 B You will still need to work through the set prose text carefully to make sure you 73
are clear about the sense of the words. As you do this, consider the structure
carefully — in a poem, you will be guided by the stanza divisions (see Unit 3); in
prose, although it is an extract from a larger whole, your teacher or the setter who
sets the paper will have taken great care to choose a passage which has a clear,
complete structure of its own.

C You will be able to identify the main concerns (or themes) of the set passage,
just as you do in poetry criticism. You know the themes of the novel as a whole,
but not all of them will be evident in the passage. Read carefully and don’t make
assumptions that aren’t based on the evidence in front of you.

D Prose writers use imagery and ﬁgures of speech just as poets do, so you will be
able to identify metaphor, hyperbole and so on in your prose extract, discussing its
meaning and effect in a similar way. Equally, identifying any noteworthy diction
is important whether you are scrutinising a poem or a piece of prose.

E The writer’s tone is an important feature of any piece of writing, whether in
prose or poetic form. If you ﬁnd this a difﬁcult aspect of analysis, you might ﬁnd
it helpful to think of tone of voice if it were read aloud and what you are able to
deduce from this.

F Finally, the atmosphere created in the prose passage is just as worthy of discussion
as it may be in a poem.

New skills to develop

A When writing about a poem, you know you need to discuss its form: its distinctive
rhythms, metrical scheme, rhyme and use of sound effects such as alliteration,
assonance and onomatopoeia. When analysing a prose passage, you will need
to look at its division into paragraphs and sentences. Don’t assume that prose
doesn’t have any rhythms of its own. In the passages that follow, you will see that JCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

prose writers also vary their sentences, use parallels and contrasts, and build to
climactic moments. Look back at the sentence from Great Expectations identiﬁed
earlier in Unit 8 (see page 56) and see how it builds into a climax.

B Prose writers also use passages of description and reﬂection which poets tend mt
to do and you will need to observe and comment on the effect of these.

C Dialogue, or passages of direct speech are widely used in the novel or short
story. When you come to the section of the book on drama (Section 3), you will
ﬁnd in Unit 16 a discussion of dialogue — because plays work only with visual
effects and words spoken by characters. Dialogue in the novel is supported and
contextualised by description, commentary and reﬂection. A character’s thoughts
in a play will need to be expressed in some kind of soliloquy or aside, but in the
novel they can be explored fully by the narrator, whether the narrative is in the

 

See Soliloquy in Unit 16,

page 115' ﬁrst or third person.
Passage question practice
ACTIVITY ".1
Using the skills described above, analyse each passage in some detail. The ﬁrst
four are from novels, the ﬁfth from a short story. Sample responses follow the
passages.
I felt forced, sometimes, to try to stop it—to stem it with
Paul had never risen from his little bed. He lay there, his childish hands—or choke its way with sand—and
listening to the noises in the street, quite tranquilly; when he saw it coming on, resistless, he cried out!
not caring much how the time went, but watching it But a word from Florence, who was always at his side,
and watching everything about him with observing restored him to himself; and leaning his poor head ,1
eyes. upon her breast, he told F loy of his dream, and smiled. I

When the sunbeams struck into his room through
the rustling blinds, and quivered 0n the opposite wall
like golden water, he knew that evening was coming
on, and that the sky was red and beautiful. As the
reﬂection died away, and a gloom went creeping up
the wall, he watched it deepen, deepen, deepen, into
night. Then he thought how the long streets were
dotted with lamps, and how the peaceful stars were
shining over head. His fancy had a strange tendency
to wander to the river, which he knew was ﬂowing
through the great city; and now he thought how
black it was, and how deep it would look, reﬂecting
the hosts of stars—and more than all, how steadily it
rolled away to meet the sea.

As it grew later in the night, and footsteps in the
street became so rare that he could hear them coming,
count them as they passed, and lose them in the
hollow distance, he would lie and watch the many-
coloured ring about the candle, and wait patiently for
day. His only trouble was, the swift and rapid river. He

Charles Dickens Dombey and Son (1848)

2

She turned the page; there were only a few lines more,
so that she would ﬁnish the story, though it was past
bed-time. It was getting late. The light in the garden
told her that; and the whitening of the ﬂowers and
something grey in the leaves conspired together, to
rouse in her a feeling of anxiety. What it was about

she could not think at ﬁrst. Then she remembered;
Paul and Minta and Andrew had not come back. She
summoned before her again the little group on the
terrace in front of the hall door, standing looking up
into the sky. Andrew had his net and basket. That
meant he was going to catch crabs and things. That
meant he would climb out on to a rock; he would be
cut off. Or coming back single ﬁle on one of those little
paths above the cliff one of them might slip. He would
roll and then crash. It was growing quite dark.its

 

 Godrevy Lighthouse.

Unit 11: Timed prose essays, critical and passage type

But she did not let her voice change in the least as
She ﬁnished the story, and added, shutting the book,
and Speaking the last words as if she had made them
up herself, looking into James’s eyes: ‘And there they
are living still at this very time.’

‘And that’s the end,’ she said, and she saw in his
eyes, as the interest of the story died away in them,
something else take its place; something wondering,
pale, like the reﬂection of a light, which at once made
him gaze and marvel. Turning, she looked across the
bay, and there, sure enough, coming regularly across
the waves ﬁrst two quick strokes and then one long
steady stroke, was the light of the Lighthouse. It had
been lit.

In a moment he would ask her, ‘Are we going to
the Lighthouse?’ And she would have to say, ‘No: not
tomorrow; your father says not.’ Happily, Mildred
came in to fetch them, and the bustle distracted
them. But he kept looking back over his shoulder as
Mildred carried him out, and she was certain that
he was thinking, we are not going to the Lighthouse
tomorrow; and she thought, he will remember that all
his life.

Virginia Woolf To the Lighthouse (1927)

 

3

But the rain when later it fell, did not break into
violence. It drizzled continuously, varying neither

in speed nor in volume. The country, it seemed, was
going to plunge into one of those stinging drizzles that
went on endlessly. On such days the sun never said
good morning, or else good night. Without a watch,
you could never guess the time.

At his mother’s hut in Thabai, Karanja crammed a
few clothes into a bag.

‘You’ll not let me make you a cup of tea?’ his
mother asked again. She sat on a stool near the
ﬁreplace; her right leg bent at the knee, resting
on a hearthstone. She was bowed double, leaning
forward, so that her chin and hands rested on the
bent knee. Wairimu was wizened, with hollow eyes
and protruding jaws. Her eyes now watched the silent
movements of her son at the door.

‘No,’ Karanja said, after a pause, as if words and
speech cost him pain.

‘It is raining outside. A cup of hot tea will warm
you inside — since you say you’ll not stay here for the
night.’

‘I’ve already said I don’t want tea — or anything,’
he said, his voice raised with obvious irritation. The
irritation was directed less at Wairimu than at the bag
he handled, the smoke-ridden hut, the drizzle outside,
at the life and things in general.

Ngﬂgi Wa Thiong’o A Grain ofWheat (1967)

4
As we drove, I tried hard not to look at the red bag — it
was torture for me, just like when Pinky Madam used
to sit in short skirts.

At a red light, I looked at the rearview mirror. I
saw my thick moustache and my jaw. I touched the
mirror. The angle of the image changed. Now I saw
long beautiful eyebrows curving on either side of
powerful, furrowed brow muscles; black eyes were
shining below those tensed muscles. The eyes of a cat
watching its prey.

G0 on,just look at the red bag, Balram — that’s not

stealing, is it?

I shook my head.

And even ifyoa were to steal it, Balram, it wouldn’t

be stealing.

How so? I looked at the creature in the mirror.

See — MrAshok is giving money to all these

politicians in Delhi so that they will excuse himﬁom

the tax he has to pay. And who owns that tax,

75Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

, in the end? Who but the ordinary people oft/12's 5
country — you! I left India in 1964 with a certiﬁcate in commerce
‘What is it Balram? Did you say something?’ and the equivalent, in those days, of ten dollars to my
I tapped the mirror. My moustache rose into view name. For three weeks I sailed on the SS Roma, an
again, and the eyes disappeared, and it was only my Italian cargo vessel, in a third-class cabin next to the
own face staring at me now. ship’s engine, across the Arabian sea, the Red Sea,
"this fellow in front of me is driving rashly, sir. the Mediterranean, and ﬁnally to England. I lived in
Iwas just grumbling.’ North London, in F insbury Park, in a house occupied
‘Keep your cool, Balram. You’re a good driver, entirely by penniless Bengali bachelors like myself, at
don’t let the bad ones get to you.’ least a dozen and sometimes more, all struggling to

, . , , educate and establish ourselves abroad.
Aravmd Adiga The White Tiger (2008)

Jhumpa Lahiri The Third and Final Continent from Interpreter
of Maladies (1999)

 

 

1 The passage, which is narrated in the third person, focuses on Paul, who
is lying in bed ill, in a house which is in a city (there is mention of streets
and lamps) but also nearto a great river. (in fact, it is set in London and
the river is the Thames.) The paragraphs trace through a day and into the
evening and night as Paul lies there watching and listening to the sights  l
and sounds, apparently not sleeping. At the end of the passage, there is a ‘
reference to telling Florence, or ‘Floy’ as he calls her, about his dream of

._
“J
m
z
o l
n.
m
I.”
:3:
Lu
..l
o.
E
<
m .

 

the world of someone very ill. He lies quite tranquil/y during the day and

at night waits patiently for daybreak. Some of his observations are gentle,
beautiful ones, such as the sunbeams and the peaceful stars. Dickens uses
onomatopoeic words to describe the effect of the sunbeams which came 
into Paul’s room through the rustling blinds and quivered on the opposite ’
wall. They are like golden water and the simile of water is in contrast to
the inexorable dark river described later in the passage. But as night
falls, the beauty falls away and as a gloom went creeping up the wall, he
watched it deepen, deepen, deepen, into night. The repetitive structure
here emphasises the night fears which afflict him. Although he tries to
think ofthe light sources, the lamps and the peacefulstars, his mind
keeps returning to the resist/e53 dark deep river flowing towards the sea.
Although Florence is described as being always at his side, Dickens so
effectively evokes Paul’s half—conscious state that we are barely aware of
Florence and her devotion.

Dickens uses sympathetic words such as his little bed and his poor
head to encourage the reader’s identification with the sick child, but his
description of the deep black river and its relentless flowing towards the
sea suggests that the child’s death is inevitable and the river symbolises
this. The passage has a very sad atmosphere and the reader is moved by
the child’s imminent death.

The sentence structures are long and cumulative, building effectively
with their repetitions a sense of the boy’s reflective and compulsive
thoughts: Then he thought how the long streets how the peacefulstars
... now he thought how black it was ... how deep... how steadily... The

ﬁne, ,,Unit 11: Timed prose essays, critical and passage type

sentences flow rhythmically and relentlessly like the river, until one
sentence near the end, whose rhythms are choppy and desperate: He felt
forced, sometimes, to try to stop it — to stem it with his childish hands — or
choke its way with sand — and when he saw it coming on, resist/e35, he cried
out./ Dickens’s use of varied sentence structures is particularly striking, and
notjust in this novel.

This passage from To the Lighthouse is written in the third person, but
centred closely on the thoughts and feelings of the main character, Mrs
Ramsay, who is reading a bedtime story to her son and worrying about
one of her other children coming home late from an evening walk by the
sea. What is striking here is the small amount of action — turning the page,
shutting the book, saying the last words of the story, looking back at the
light ofthe lighthouse and the boy being carried out to bed by Mildred.
Most of the passage is about Mrs Ramsay’s thoughts, many ofthem
imagined, feared events, using the modal verb would for conjecture — he
would be cutoff, he would roll and then crash; and later in the passage she
imagines he would ask her about the lighthouse visit, which his severe
father has already vetoed. She envisages what her son is thinking, and
the final imagined thought of the passage is a certain one, expressed in a
simple future, not he would, but he will remember that all his life. Even the
direct speech used is an invented conversation. None of Mrs Ramsay’s
thoughts and imaginings are about herself: they are all empathetic,
centred on her sons, and this is typical of the portrayal of her character
throughout the novel. it is not a passage rich in metaphorical language,
though there is personification in the first paragraph: the whitening of
the flowers and something grey in the leaves conspired together — it is this
that reminds her the others have not yet returned home and leads to her
worrying about them. She does not allow this worry to enter her voice as
she finishes the story, because she does not want her son to pick up her
anxiety.

Short though this passage is, it is a remarkable depiction ofa mother’s
thoughts and feelings, centred on the welfare of her children, shot through
with anxious imaginings. Even if we did not know the title of the novel, we
would sense the importance of the lighthouse as some sort of symbol or
motif having particular significance, with the words wondering and marvel
being used and clinched finally in the short sentence: It had been lit at the
end of the penultimate paragraph.

This third—person narrative deals with Karanja packing up and leaving his
mother’s house. it begins and ends with a description of the weather and
the setting, and in the central section gives the conversation between
Karanja and his mother.

Although Wairimu is described, it is clear that the narrator is closer
to the character of Karanja as his thoughts and feelings are given to the
reader while hers are not. The descriptions of Wairimu are external ones:
She was bowed double, leaning forward . .. Her eyes now watched the
silent movements ofher son. Karanja’s feelings are closely observed and
conveyed to the reader: as if words and speech cost him pain; his voice
raised with obvious irritation  at the life and things in general.

Ngﬂgi uses pathetic fallacy to enhance the feelings of Karanja, so that
the dull, wretched weather reflects his own mood. The personification of
the sun in the first paragraph —- the sun never said good morning, or else

 

77Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

good night— effectively suggests the way in which mood can be created by
the weather, or weather can chime in with mood.

The dialogue is brief and concerns an everyday matter — having a cup
of tea. if this were a play, the two characters would have only a brief
interchange. But because it is a novel, the writer is able to explore and
expand on the feelings of one of the characters in particular and use the
setting of the smoke—ridden hut, the drizzle outside to give depth to those
feelings.

Ngugi’s style is precise and his sentences brief and elegant. it is easy to
picture the scene and to appreciate the feelings of Karanja, but there is no
attempt to draw sympathy for him here — this is the human condition, and
we have to just get on with it.

 

4 This is a passage from a first—person, past—tense narrative about a
chauffeur, Balram, who steals from, and eventually murders, his employer
Mr Ashok. The red bag referred to here is filled with money for bribes. The
narrator is, from the outset, candid about his obsession with the bag,just
as he had been obsessively attracted to Pinky Madam sitting in the back of
the car with her short skirts. The word torture gives insight metaphorically
to these fixations.

He keeps nothing from the reader and we are entirely aware of his
dissatisfaction with his lot as a humble chauffeur who just drives around
all day but has a rich inner life. However, he is torn between respect for
proper behaviour as a servant and his compulsive desire to break free and

be independent, which is imaged frequently in the novel as two voices
ﬂ speaking to him, or two alternative scenarios being proposed. When he

looks at himself in the mirror, he sees first of all his own simple physical

reflection, and then when he moves the mirror, that of his more persuasive
W demonic alter ego with its eyes ofa cat watching its prey. The novelist uses
‘ dialogue to present the alter ego’s voice of temptation with its political

An alter ego or 9th,er_se[f '5 persuasions about who the money belongs to: who but the ordinarypeople
acharacterwho is Similarto . . .
_ . ' ofthe country —you!, as well as the v0ice ofthe employer asking if he
another in the text, oronewho . . . .
' “ ‘ ~ has spoken. The first-person past—tense narrative is the perfect medium

representstheautuhor in some“ . . . .
Way, or, ‘as'her’rey a, diﬁérenvf L for presentation of his story: the discrepancy between the ordinary

Ngﬂgi Wa Thiong’o in 2013.

aspect Ofsrdé (ifth‘egc‘h‘araﬁerr‘i interchanges of daily working life and the innermost thoughts and desires
being presented. An example of ' 0fthe persona, which are entirely opaque to others. The narrator’s lively
the ﬁrst deﬁnition couidbe Oriick descriptions and juxtapositions make the novel both humorous and

in GreatExpectations, as a much shocking. We cannot help but sympathise with Balram, but the graphic
darker alter ego of Pip. description of the murder and his certain knowledge that his family will

be awfully punished (even though they are an unsympathetic group)
leave us with very mixed feelings. (If you are not studying this novel, it is a
recommended read!)

5 At first sight, this appears to be a factual, autobiographical account of a
Bengali man who has left his native country and is seeking to educate and
establish himselfabroad. The reader may wonder ifthis is a short story at
all, orjust a series of unimaginative facts about the writer’s life. However,
if one looks more closely, one can see signs of a narrator who tries to
express simple facts without emotion, but who has clearly suffered. His
poverty is evident — only ten dollars in his pocket, only a third-class cabin
in a hot and noisy part of the ship, sharing a house in not the best part of
London with twelve or more others like himself. The length of his voyage
is emphasised in the list of seas he crossed over three weeks. The wholeUnit 11: Timed prose essays, critical and passage type

 

paragraph, with its apparently factual details, builds to the moment when
he uses the word struggling to describe his experience. But he has not
become self—centred in this: he identifies with all the others like himself
when he says ourselves, not ‘myself’. The story reveals him to be a sensitive
but reserved person trying to adapt in a different world (he moves from

   
 
 
 
 
 
 

TIP '
Up  Attention to the detail of

- language, form and tone is
l i essential in writing critical
: ysis of prose extracts.

 

We _ anal S substantiate your Britain to the United States), and in spite of finding happiness in his

Se ., ﬁgaasywith brief supporting marriage and living in his new milieu for thirty years, still reflecting on the
quotation, mysterious nature of the ‘ordinary’ person’s ‘ordinary’ life: It is beyond my

/ to mm imagination.

; no W

and

Writing a critical essay on prose

Ier '
7‘ ACTIVITY 11.2

Refer to Unit 27 in Part 3 for advice on structuring your material, then read
the following essays. You do not need to have studied the novels Things

Fall Apart by Chinua Achebe or Half of a Yellow Sun by Chimamanda
Ngozi Adichie to appreciate the essays, as their arguments are very clearly
structured. It is possible to appreciate the development of the argument,

use of examples and precision of expression whether or not you know the
:l : novels well.

79

 

Essay title: ‘Women can be seen as both superior and inferior to men in
Things Fall Apart.’ In the light of this statement, discuss your View of the
position of women in the novel.

SAMPLE ESSAY

It is true that the presentation of women in Things Fol/Apart is an apparently
contrasting one. One view of them is that they are supreme; while another

is that they are really outsiders in the society. The novel explores these two
perspectives of women.

Without question, the society is intrinsically patriarchal. This is evidenced
throughout in many ways, with many of the important ceremonies being ‘for
men’. Ibo women have no say in village matters such as legislation, village
councils and war. The running of the village is done by men. Meetings in the
town square are conducted by men as well. Unsurprisingly, at the highest
level of the Ibojudiciary system — the egwugwu — it is the titled and influential
men like Okonkwo behind the masks. Women are generally uninvolved. At the
egwugwu—judging ceremony, for example, the man’s wife is not even there to 5
present her case. Her brothers-in-law represent her. This indicates the lack of l
a woman’s case in political society. '

Ibo women are also treated as inferior to men; moreover, their inferiority
is accepted by both men and women. For example, all Ibo society accepts
wife—beating as an allowed practice. In addition, women are bargained
off to suitors with a suitable dowry which is negotiated by men. The bride
is involved only in the role of serving. In general, the women seem to be
outsiders in a lot of aspects of village life: socially they are considered inferior,
politically they are not present. The roles they do play in the village are
domestic ones — cooking, cleaning and looking after children.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

v" Even in agriculture there is a ready distinction between men and women.
Okonkwo asserts that plants like coco—yam and beans are what women

and children grow — Yam was a man’s plant. The importance of yams as a
subsistence product is evidenced by the New Yam Festival, so women are
inferior in this respect.

Religiously too there is evidence of male and female distinction. The spirits
that appeared for Ezudu’s funeral are entirely men — The most dreaded of
all [the spirits]  he was always alone. The egwugwu are entirely male. In
families, as we can see from Okonkwo, it is always the man who can set up a
shrine to his own personal god. From all this, we may draw the conclusion that
women were inferiorto men, outsiders in their life.

Perhaps the most important and direct representation of lbo women as
inferior societal outsiders is the recurrence ofthe term agbala throughout
the novel.Agbala is defined very early on as a derogatory term for a titleless
man, but we also find out that it means ‘woman’. The equation ofa woman to
a titleless man, in a society where title is ajudge of a man’s individual worth,
can hardly be a clearer indication of where women stand in lbo society.

However, the novel does not give only a one-sided presentation of women.
Women do play an important part in Ibo society. Clearly, in terms of religion,
there is male domination in the areas of worship,judicial ceremony and
gods. However, we are introduced to two figures that assert a female role in is
this area — Ani and Chielo. Ani is the earth goddess representing fertility and
abundance. The whole of lbo society, including men, respect her highly, as
evidenced by the incidents of the week of peace, in which one of the village
elders expresses great disapproval at Okonkwo’s careless disregard for
the rule against wife—beating. This incident shows two things: one, that to
displease Ani would incur her wrath and was considered a genuine threat to
the village’s well—being; and two, that there were existing limitations on the
practice of wife—beating. The latter is reinforced later with the men’s verdict
as egwugwu that it is not bravery when a man fights a woman. The society - r
is collectively aware that women do have a place. We can see this also by
the appropriation oftitles by women, for example the eldest wife in the
household.

Chielo too is a prominent figure. She is a respected and feared priestess —
the Oracle. The Oracle features prominently in male decisions regarding war:
for example, the Oracle was consulted over the issue of the lbo woman killed
by another clan. The lbo respect the Oracle’s words and choose the peaceful
solution, believing she is the voice of Agbala, a goddess. We can see here that
agbala is notjust a derogatory name for a man but a significant religious —
and female—symbol.

In short, we can see two apparently conflicting presentations of women —
one that perceives women as inferior outsiders in most of lbo society, and one
that reveres their status as superior. But the two are not so much conflicting
as logically complementary. The statement mother is supreme indicates
the reverential status of women in the context oftheir roles in society as
mothers, a role of unparalleled importance since children will grow up to take
their places in the clan. This creates a new perception of how women m and
men — are presented in the novel: both occupy their respective spheres. The
ceremony may be for men, but women have their day too, when they take
over the job of collectively cooking for the whole village. Their contributions
to religion and society are of fertility (Ani) and peace (Oracle). Since we can
see throughout the novel that the lbo society is heavily agricultural, as well
as typically gentle, diplomatic and peaceful, the importance of these twoUnit 11: Timed prose essays, critical and passage type

  

contributions cannot be underestimated. This complementary duality is also
supported in the structure of the novel by the fact that the ones who fail —
Okonkwo and Unoka — see males as superior, whilst the successful character
Obierika understands the importance of both sexes throughout.

 
 
 

J

 

 
 

 

Essay title: Discuss some of the ways in which Adichie uses food and meals
in the novel Halfofa Yellow Sun.

 

SAMPLE ESSAY

 

  

Food and meals are a motifwhich runs throughoutAdichie’s novel, from
Ugwu’s startled encounter with Master’s overflowing fridge at the beginning,
to the scenes of starvation in the Biafran war at the end. Meals are shared out
of friendship and hospitality, but food is also imaged as a symbol ofdifferent
cultures: the Westernised and the African. There is a difference between
village culture and the more sophisticated city culture, too. The making of
meals in a kitchen can also be a way of showing dominance ofone person
over another, imaging in miniature the enforced starvation ofa whole people
whom the enemy wish to crush in war.

These contrasts are clearly seen in the narrative concerning Ugwu. Ugwu,
the unsophisticated village boy who becomes Master’s servant, is shown to
develop and mature in the novel and this is symbolised in his learning to cook.
When he first arrives and Master tells him to help himself from the fridge, he is
overwhelmed by the array of food on offer and, in a humorous scene, gorges
himself with cooked chicken, putting some into his pockets for later. His
development is imaged in his learning from Olanna how to cook sophisticated
African food, which she and the Master and their frequent house guests will
enjoy, and he takes pride in this achievement. He is contrasted with Harrison,
the servant who makes only Western food for Richard although he admits
he eats native food at home. Richard, as an expatriate character who wants
to integrate further into African life, has to tell him to stop cooking beets in
different ways — beets being a vegetable not used in Nigeria, but in Harrison’s
eyes a Western dish. Richard would rather eat hot pepper soup than the
canapés created by Harrison for a party, because Richard is trying to steep
himself in African ways. Richard’s extreme physical reaction to the hot pepper is
also amusineg drawn. Ironically, Harrison’s western meal which includes lemon
tart praised by Kainene as being better than the one she had in London prefaces
the scene where she and Richard have an enormous row with each other.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Ugwu’s development is further revealed when he goes home to his village
and we see his reaction to eating village food again: he feels the endless gassy
churning in his stomach from eating only fruit and nuts. He has not only become
a more sophisticated cook, but cannot eat traditional village food without
feeling unwell. He is also taken aback when Master’s mother arrives from the
country and takes over the kitchen, which has become his domain.

At this point, the use of food to dominate others, already suggested in
Harrison and Ugwu, is shown clearly in the character of Master’s mother,
only here it is a contrast between country cooking and city cooking, not
Westernised food. I want to cook a propersoup for myson, she says and sweeps
away all the new cookery techniques that Ugwu has learned from Olanna. It
is all part of her plot to get Olanna away from Odenigbo and marry him to a
village girl of her choice. Although she is thwarted and the kitchen is returned
to Ugwu, the girl she has brought to her son’s bed becomes pregnant, and
ultimately Baby is looked after by Olanna and Odenigbo, becoming a symbol
of a generation of Biafran children who are affected by conflict. The search
for her food and attempts to stop her from getting kwashiorkor are central
to the later more tragic phase ofthe novel, when everyone is starving and
deprivation becomes a weapon of war.

The gradual darkening of the tone ofthe novel as war approaches is
reinforced by the difficulties faced by the characters in finding food. Baby is
given dried egg yolk when they can get it instead of real eggs, Olanna finds
herself fighting for a tin of corned beef, and the relief packages from the Red
Cross with their condensed milk, Ovaltine and salt seem luxurious. But Ugwu
hated the relieffood. Their extreme situation is imaged in Olanna’s visit to the
market, where she considers: lfshe bought the chicken it would be all she would
buy. 50 she bought four medium sized snails instead.

As well as the symbolic use of food to represent hardship, Adichie’s use
of a non—chronological narrative brings the situation into sharp relief. The
juxtaposition of images of plenty, and feasting with friends, and images of
starvation and desperate theft between neighbours reinforce the horrors of
the war and the tragedy ofthose caught up in it, moving between the early
sixties and the late sixties to emphasise this.

Food and meals are a constant motif in this novel, successfully used in both
comic and tragic scenes, to show the maturation of individual characters, the
dominance of one person over another and of one ethnic group over another,
leading to the horrors of starvation in civil war, which Adichie presents
graphically to readers ofthis novel.

x J

 

 

 

«Nmuaawwkmwsa»InxwaaummaWmaemmkymmmmm

TIP

Know your set text really
well, answer the question
and structure your argument
clearly, illustrating it as
appropriate.

funﬁwmﬁﬁwrmmv mmmww
a

it
§
§
.4
g
f
i

j

“«¥«isrmsmwwvnmmlwm’maqéwmvmﬁ/ mamxmr.wwmm»mﬁ”