Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Unit 13: Studying the themes of plays

Here are some common concerns explored by playwrights, vividly presented with
all the resources of the theatrical context. You have already started to consider
some of these ideas.

The family drama

Almost everyone belongs to a family and has parents and probably brothers and/
or sisters. If you are a mature student you may be married or have children of
your own. This basic domestic and social situation is one of the great universal
experiences that forms the basis for most Shakespearean and other dramas.

ACTIVITY 13.1

If possible, in a group, share the details of your family and where you are
positioned in it. For example, are you the middle one of three children, as I
am? Or are you the older brother of two? Do you have only one parent? Are
you an only child? More importantly, how do you feel about it? Do you think
your younger sister/ brother is the favourite of your father? Does your mother
or father tell you what to do? In the marriages you have observed, is there a

dominant partner?

Here is a table showing some examples of plays which include family conﬂict:

 
   

Universalmeans thateveryone
can relate to the experience;

“S l.“

   

Family relationship

  
   

    

I Play I Type of conflict

Macbeth (Shakespeare)

    
 

    

Married couple Tragic influence

   
 
  

    
     
     
   
   

Different aspects of
colonial attitudes

Death and the King’s
Horseman (Soyinka)

   

 
 
    
   
   
 
  

   
  

The Comedy ofErrors
(Shakespeare)

The comedy of the nagging
wife

   
   
  
 

   
 

Siblings (brothers and
sisters — sometimes twins)

Hamlet, King Lear, The

Tempest, Much Ado About
Nothing and many others
(Shakespeare)

A good and an evil brother;
ifa tragedy, the evil one
does great harm; if a
comedy, all is resolved in
the end

    
  
   
 

 
 
  

  
    

The Taming ofthe Shrew
(Shakespeare)

Two sisters of very different
character

    
   

Top Girls (Churchill) Two sisters of very
different character, here
representing political

attitudes as well

    
 
    
 
 
 

    

   

Brother and sister in
serious conflict though
they love each other

Measure for Measure;

      

Wole Soyinka, Nobel Lau reate.l with
er

nd/

11

poetry; p _

 Look closely at the pairing
 of characters in the play

:_ you are studying, whether
 related by family or by
 function in the drama.
 ihey may seem at ﬁrst to
3:: be opposites, but when
 you study them more
 Closely they may be more

_;ambiguous, with parallels as
{well as contrasts.

 

 

     

Unit 13: Studying the themes of plays

   

  

Twelfth Night; The Comedy
ofErrors (Shakespeare)

  
   

Twins who look alike and
are very close, creating
comic effects

    
    
 

 

After the Revolution
(Herzog)

Hamlet, The Merchant
of Venice, The Tempest,
A Midsummer Night’s
Dream and many others
(Shakespeare)

 
 
    
     
    
   

  
   
   
   
 

   
   
   
   
 

     
   
   
  
   
   

 

Father and son or daughter
NB Not many mothers
appearin Shakespeare’s

plays

Fathers are domineering
and controlling, often
demandingthe impossible
and creating tension
which may be tragic, or an
obstacle to overcome in
comedy

    
  
 

  

Death ofa Salesman (Miller)

 

The Dilemma of a Ghost
(Aidoo)

 
 
  

   

  

A Man forA/l Seasons (Bolt) Thomas More and his
daughter are very close
and he has educated her
at a time when few women

were educated

     
 
  
   
 
  
  

     
   
   
  

        
    

Entire family, including Homesick (Alfian Sa’at)
husbands and wives of
children and the father’s

mistress

Acomic portrayal of
family tensions against an

outbreak of the contagious
virus SARS

 
 

Shakespeare’s use of balanced characterisations also reveals a love of patterns, of
parallels and contrasts which illuminate each other through juxtaposition, and this
. reminds us that his plays are both poetry and drama.

Ybuﬂ1andage

Linked with the family drama, but not always, is the conﬂict between older and
younger generations, also a favourite theme of the novel. The younger rises when
the old doth fall comes from the last scene of King Lear and encapsulates this theme
perfectly. The older characters may be envious of the young, or moved by them and
their potential; the younger characters may be respectful or scornful of their elders,
~ these relationships are seen in many plays.

I Romeo and Inliet emphasises through its imagery and action the contrast
between the young and the old, and the lovers’ parents are all part of the older
generation, as are the Nurse and the Friar.

I My Children! My Africa! and The Road to Mecca (both by Fugard) have younger
characters whose honesty and idealism are in direct contrast with more mature
characters.

I Aidoo’s Anowa shows the parents in conﬂict with their daughter over her choice

of husband.

Love

Love is a favourite theme of comedies, which often end in marriages and pairings,
but it is also signiﬁcant in tragedy.

I Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra and Romeo and Juliet are both love
tragedies.

89Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

I The course oftrue love never did run smooth as one ofthe characters says in
A Midsummer Night’s Dream, and most audiences expect these complications
in a play.

I In Shakespeare’s comedies, love is also imaged as a kind of madness, and can

Does love feature in the
play that you are studying?

ACTIVITY 13.3

 

 

 

 

Consider whether passion Titania and Bottom.
for a person or something ,
else (such as greed for I In Death of a Salesman (Miller), Willy loves his wife, but the brief sexual
money) is an issue explored affair he has had with another woman because of the loneliness of his life as
in the play. a travelling salesman is a mainspring of the plot and the core of the problems
between him and his elder son, Biff.
Gender debates

W The ‘battle of the sexes’ is one of the great themes of literature. Gender debates ﬁll
Shakespeare’s comedies, with the battle of the sexes raging in The Taming of the

cross-dressmg takes place Shrew and Much Ado About Nothing, and cross~dressing in Twelfth Night and As
when characters ofone

gender dress asthe other. m You Like It reminding the audience of the complexities of sexuality. _
shakespeare’s day, an the parts In A Midsummer Night’s Dream, the apparently tangential (i.e. not closely l
were played by men and boys, so connected to the main action) characters of Theseus and Hippolyta open the play 
a boy COUId be dressed as a girl with a reminder ofhow they came to be betrothed: Hippolyta, I wooed thee with 

ILA/12?:fo f;§?;3:5t::::gizsn:e my sword / And won thy love doing thee injuries, says Theseus — hardly a gentle

. . romantic start to their relationshi .' This is aralleled b the sava er of the
ofthe complexnties ofhuman p p y g y
sexuality interchanges between the fairy king and queen, Oberon and Titania, and the love
combats between the lovers under the inﬂuence of the love potion.

I The vulnerability of both sexes is evident throughout Shakespeare’s tragedies
too, with women’s honour underpinning men’s reputation in Othello.

I Honour and reputation are similarly key themes in all Restoration comedy,
giving rise to much comic business.

KrUnit 13: Studying the themes of plays

 

 

I The feminist issue is paramount in Top Girls by Caryl Churchill, with the first

‘  "P scene establishing the theme strongly.
s ,

a ., a 

t
i
7 Having Women dressing 1 I The opening of Fugard’s play My Children! My Africa! uses a debate about the
i as men giVes Shakespeare genders to establish the relationship between Thami and Isabel.
 the opportun'ty to eXplore l I Alan Ayckbourn’s comedy Absurd Person Singular takes three married couples
.f derisgues and forces I . I . I _ _
en- /readers out of l and sets an act of the play in each of their kltchens in turn. There is nothlng like
1 aUCl'egoclfjentional views g a kitchen for bringing out the tensions in a married couple’s relationship! You
_ tcet'hre place of women in a ; will notice how many of these examples illustrate the importance of the ﬁrst
ﬁnale—mminated $0Clety. This scene in establishing a theme that runs through the work, similar to what you
is a poPUlar area for _exa.m established in prose works.
questions on comedies in
particula“ Power and authority

So far, the themes mentioned have been familial or personal ones. But much drama
is also concerned with power and authority and with the nature of society and the
way it is governed.

  
   

  

Acnvn'v 13.4

 

 

 

: a With the help Ofyour I Even in domestic dramas such as Death of a Salesman (Miller) the social

"fteaCher’ ﬁnd 0m how pressures of the time are a powerful background to the action, and society’s

7 imam, Of Shakespeare’s expectations of conventional behaviour drive Willy’s actions and behaviour i I
finch” Contain cross-gender towards his children. ‘
gdisgmses and how they I After the Revolution (Herzog) depends upon strong political views and whether

 are uSEd in the play‘ Does individuals act with integrity, in this case threatening personal and familial

 disguise of other kinds relationships.

 feature in the plays You have I In Top Girls, Churchill’s focus falls upon the patriarchal societies that women

if StudiEd? have had to endure throughout history. 91

I Arthur Miller’s play The Crucible reveals the powerful grip of a ruling group

' who rule by fear and will not allow individual freedom of thought and speech.

I A Man for All Seasons (Bolt) takes a well—known era in English history for its
portrayal of the absolute monarch Henry VIII, who is determined to have his
own way and ready to remove all opposition in order to satisfy his desires.

I In Fugard’s plays, the apartheid era in South Africa enshrines the power of a
ruling group who are one particular race, which seeks to dominate the others.
This is an important context for many works of the colonial and post-colonial
eras.

All of Shakespeare’s history plays, and most of his tragedies, are close examinations
of politics and power, and the ambitions of those who would seek to aggrandise
themselves: nobles wanting to become kings, kings wanting to dominate or

wage war, politicians wanting to manipulate or blame others. If there are such

disturbances in society, then order will give way to chaos, and peace may slide into
war.

I Shakespeare uses images of breakdown in nature and the wider environment to
mirror and intensify this chaos. Under such circumstances some followers will
be treacherous, others loyal — another area of great interest to the playwright.

I He often shows that a person’s mind is like a kingdom which can lose its control
and become disordered, even gripped by madness. In King Lear the disorder in
the king’s mind is mirrored in the breakdown of society in his kingdom, and is
given metaphorical emphasis by the huge storm. In Macbeth, the murder of the
king is accompanied by terrible disruption in nature itself, described in Act 2
Scene 4 by Ross and the old man.

   

is a useful term forthe
eﬂection ofone thingCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 13.5

i
i
i
l

Who wields authority in the
play that you are studying?
Who has power and in what
way do they use it? Who
shows themselves to be loyal
and who acts treacherously
in their own self—interest?
What social pressures are
shown to impinge upon

the lives of the characters?
Make a list of your answers
to these questions and
discuss them with a
classmate.

Bed» trick is the substitution of

one actorforanotherpretending.
to be someone else in bed in the
dark. ” ‘ M _ 
Farce is comedy full of _  g ‘
exagger-t d " ' I"  ' '

  

7 impro

plot.'T:he‘humoruris‘Often‘very?
physical.

Mistaken identity is-where - _ *
charactersdisguisethernselves, ,
pretend tobe whatlthey are not,
act or puton’ a‘IShow‘ and behave
hypo’cr‘itically.’ I < ‘ ‘ " 1

WWWW

TIP

A playwright’s use of
the contrast between

beneath is by no means
simplistic: sometimes good

characters are forced to

to survive in a hostile world.

disguise themselves in order jg

a: mewmm Wawwnwmgﬂmwwam.mmuummmmw

\
l
appearance and the reality 
i
i

If you are studying Macbeth, consider the detailed evidence in the text that the
king’s death is disruptive of society and nature as a whole. Your answer to this
will help you to understand what happens when Caesar is assassinated in Iulz'us
Caesar. In Top Girls, how many women reach the top in a business environment
and with what eﬂect on their attitudes to other people — men and women? In My
Children! My Africa], consider the effect that disenfranchisement has on the young
population of a country. How can they react to this without Violence?

Appearance and reality

One of the great themes of Shakespearean and Restoration drama is the contrast
between the way things appear to be and what they really are. Perhaps it is not
surprising that men and women of the theatre are obsessed with the deceitfulness
of surfaces. For whatever reason, this dichotomy (or split) between being and
seeming runs through the characters, the situations and the language of all of
Shakespeare’s plays, and of the plays of the Restoration period.

Characters disguise themselves, pretend to be what they are not, act or put
on a show and behave hypocritically. Apparently noble characters are revealed to
have ﬂaws, fools are shown to be wiser than clever people, and even the evil can
sometimes have redeeming features. ‘Don’t judge at face value’ seems to be a central
theme of all of Shakespeare’s work, and it is highly ironic that he should use that
most artiﬁcial of media — the theatre — to persuade us to think more deeply about
what appears before our eyes.

In Measure for Measure and other plays, the darkness of night allows for what
is known as a bed trick: the substitution of one woman for another pretending to
be someone else, a trick used elsewhere by Shakespeare and a favourite device of
comedy and farce.

A comic and a tragic example

In The Comedy of Errors, the fact that there are two pairs of identical twins, the
Antipholus brothers and their servants the Dromio brothers, allows Shakespeare to
create a chaotic world of mistaken identity which is hilarious for the audience but
confusing for the characters, who are forced to face the issues of their own nature
and identity before all is resolved.

In the tragedy King Lear, the characters of Kent and Edgar are forced to disguise
themselves as a serving man and the mad beggar Poor Torn respectively, giving rise
to many of the play’s deepest insights into the human condition, so disguise and
mistaken identity are not always comic features.

ACTIVITY 13.6

Make a list of the dominant ideas or themes in the play that you are studying.
As you develop your skills of analysis, you will be able to identify the means
by which the playwright explores these themes: through the play’s structure
and action, through characterisation, and through language and tone.