Unit 31: Writing longer essays/coursework

 

Unit 31: Writing longer essays/coursework

First, you need to make quite sure that you know what you are aiming for. If you
are submitting coursework you may have, for example, 2000—3000 words for two
essays, or up to 3500 for one essay — or an alternative word count, so make sure you
know the rules before you begin the work. Note that quotations and bibliography
are not part of the word count — but check your syllabus to be sure.

Text selection

If you need two texts for your coursework, check whether they must be in different
forms (poetry, prose and drama). Also check if you need to select main texts and
subsidiary texts, and if they can be in the same form (all novels for example). Also
consider whether you need to make a comparison of them.

Usually your chosen works must be literary texts and they should normally
be as demanding as the texts on a timed exam paper (one or two poems won’t be
enough, for example, to count as a text, unless it’s a long text like Paradise Lost).

Make sure that your chosen texts are not used elsewhere on the syllabus, as
there is often a rule about this (though the individual writers may be reused, for
example a different Shakespeare play would be acceptable).

Check if your texts should all have been written in English — on many
syllabuses, no translations are allowed.

. . 257 7
Managing your material

1 I Get the balance right. ‘
I Think about your word limit. If you imagine a typical paragraph to be 
around 200 words, that’s about ﬁve paragraphs for a 1000 word essay, eight 
paragraphs for a 1500 word essay and 17 paragraphs for a 3500 wCrd essay. ‘
Take away the introduction and conclusion and you will see how many
paragraphs you need to write for your coursework essay. You can adjust this
by looking at your own work. How many words do you have in one of your
typical paragraphs in a shorter essay? Make the adjustment and work out the
number of paragraphs. This is just a rough guide, of COurse, but it does give
you a sense of the overall structure of your essay.
I Follow the rules for essay writing in Unit 28. Make sure that you link your
paragraphs well. If you are writing on poetry, for example, and use four
poems, have you said enough to relate them to each other?
I If you need to write about main texts and subsidiary texts, it is usual to write an
introduction to all your texts, then make reference to both main texts within
each paragraph, or if you devote a paragraph to one text only, bring in the
second text in the next paragraph. Don’t go for pages and pages on only one of
your texts; this is a more common problem than you’d think! It’s often clear to
the reader that one of the texts is favoured over the others.
Some students refer to all of their texts in each paragraph of the essay. '1
You don’t have to do that with your subsidiary texts: a few well—discussed ‘
paragraphs relating them to your main theme would be enough if your
comments show clearly that you have studied them and know how they
relate to the main texts. One or two sentences on each work in a long essay
are not enough.Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

2 Don’t forget to comment on form, structure and language.

I In any literature essay, you are analysing the writing, not just the ideas. Be
careful if you’ve chosen texts, often novels, where you can easily forget about
this because you are fascinated by the theme; say, the idea of the future
created in a science ﬁction topic, or the notion of an (American Dream’.
How is it done? What literary means does the author use? Close analysis of
language is always important.

3 Use critical material but always attribute it.

and on the Internet. Failure to acknowledge the words of others can lead to
plagiarism, which has dire consequences. See Unit 32 for further guidance
on this.
4 Stay within the word limit.

I Quotations, bibliographies and footnotes do not usually count towards the
word limit.

I Don’t go over your limit and don’t include in your footnotes large amounts
of discursive material that should be in the main body of the essay. Footnotes
are intended to be brief references to page numbers and the like.