Unit 32: Using critics

‘ Unit 32: Using critics

TIP

Writing the words of someone
else as if they were your

own (plagiarism) is a very
serious offence with serious
consequences. Never do this.

Write your own essays in
your own words. Ifsomeone
else expresses a great idea
really well, then quote it,
put it in quotation marks
and attribute it in a footnote
or bibliography. Search
engines can readily identify
plagiarised sentences and
even phrases, so do not be
tempted. Plan carefully,
use yourtime well, and
take pleasure in your own
achievement.

 

Personal response is always valued in responses to literature, particularly when it
is ‘informed’ by knowledge and understanding of texts. However, syllabuses also
highlight the importance of being able to appreciate and discuss varying opinions.

You have opinions — so do your classmates, and your teacher guides you with his
or her opinion too. There are probably helpful notes in your textbook and a wealth
of other material in books and online. These all suggest ways of looking at your
texts and interpretations you may not have thought of yourself. Reading literary
criticism can be an inspiring, enriching and enjoyable experience. New ideas
about your old favourites still have the power to thrill and energise your brain.
Always take the opportunity to go to the theatre to see plays, if you can. Every new
production produces new insights. Why do so many directors continue year after
year with Shakespeare productions? Because each one offers some new perceptions
for us to think about.

Literary criticism is a well-established genre and there are many ‘schools’ of
criticism. However, you will ﬁnd that some more recent literary theorists may seem
more like philosophers than professors of literature and thus more diﬂficult to read
and understand; you should not be discouraged by this. Many older critics have
valuable insights in an accessible style. Be guided by your teacher and by your own
trial and error.

Advice on using other sources

Be discriminating — take care with some of the readily available study guides and
‘Notes’ series, both in print and online. Some of them tell the story, paraphrase or
describe rather than analyse and are thus not illustrating advanced skills.

Read widely, but make sure you have studied your primary text well ﬁrst, so that
you understand the thrust of any critical argument from another source.

Make notes of interesting ideas and critical statements that you feel could be
useful in an essay of your own, always remembering to attribute them.

Watching DVDs or ﬁlmed versions — making a literary text into another form
such as a ﬁlm is, in itself, an act of literary criticism, since the ﬁlm maker will have
to exclude, include and adjust material which will change the original in many
ways. Enjoy these versions but always remain aware of their potential for distortion.
Film is a different medium, and Film Studies is a discrete subject.

However, you can incorporate the pleasure of Watching a ﬁlm into the classroom
by deliberately comparing the handling of different sequences. It is probably helpful
if you know the original text reasonably well, so that you don’t get muddled when
writing about the original novel or play (for example, saying something about a
character’s red dress being a symbol of blood when it’s not mentioned in the novel
at all).

I Read a section — watch the scene on ﬁlm.

I Find examples where the words on the page have been used to create a
background or atmosphere.

I Consider whether any dialogue has been directly used from the original work or
adapted signiﬁcantly.

I Are any characters omitted? Why do you think this might have been done?

259Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

I Compare different ﬁlmed versions of the same work. This is particularly helpfu
for Shakespeare and especially for a favourite such as Romeo and Juliet. I enjoy
all the different ﬁlmed versions of this play and think they can each offer a
thought—provoking interpretation.

I Search YouTube and other Internet sites for individual scenes for consideration
and comparison.

1

Personal Response Your own response to what you read is all-important. GiVe
yourself the best chance by reading carefully and without distractions. Ask YOurself
if you have considered all the evidence in the text and not jumped to conclusions.

Examples of using critics’ comments

You will ﬁnd that each sample essay in Part 2 of this book has at least one critical
comment to enhance the argument. Here are some others:

1 {3n Gthello {from a passage «question an Act 4 Scene 3.)

l
Critic Gamini Salgado writes: whateverpity we have for him now is inextricably 
entangled with horror and disgust at his behaviour to his wife, and I agree with 

 

this assessment. Even though we have watched lago working his poisonous
thoughts into Othello’s mind, the words and action here stun the audience.

 

The candidate elaborates on the point and introduces audience reaction directly.

I 2 {an Measere ferMeasare {tram an essay which discusses tsabetla}

l
Isabella is, however, not a sympathetic character. At the beginning of the third
act, her scorn of Claudio’s weakness has been described by E. M. W. Tillyard
as dramatically definitive andperfect while his pleas are considered pathetic.

 

One cannot argue with the dramatic quality of the scene, but an audience’s
sympathies are more with Claudio who is a much more likeable, less extreme
character, so i am not convinced by Tillyard’s view.

 

The candidate has strong feelings about these two characters and is not afraid to
challenge the critic.

3 {m taskin’s peetry (tram art essay which incéacies An Arendei itsth

Nicholas Marsh has described what he calls the comic elements in An Arundel
Tomb, but this is a distortion of the tone of the poem. It is ironic, but this is

 

part of a serious exploration of life and death.

 

The candidate only uses two words of the critic, but to very useful effect, reminding
you that quotations do not need to be long.Unit 32: Using critics

 

4 0n Pinter’s plays (from a passage question)

Martin Esslin coined the term Theatre ofthe Absurd and used it to describe
Pinter’s bizarre conversational sequences. Within the first ten lines of this

 

extract we can see an example of this style.

 

This candidate shows knowledge of particular terminology and uses a few words of
deﬁnition and description to apply to the passage.

5 0n Arundhati Royis The God omeal! Things

Amit Chaudhuri has argued that the novel is a reworking of To Kill a
Mockingbird by Harper Lee and it does have some elements in common, such

 

as the two children in the small town, the History House like Boo Radley’s
house and the black man accused of rape.

 

Here the critic’s views are clearly mentioned, but without direct quotation. This is

perfectly acceptable.

261