Unit 34: Troubleshooting

 

Unit 34: Troubleshooting

All students would like to write better essays, especially under exam or test
conditions. This unit is to help you to identify some of the pitfalls of writing under
the pressure of time and how to avoid them.

I’ve divided the problems into different categories (A—F below) to help you see
where you might have been at fault in essays you’ve done before. There are examples
to help you identify each problem precisely. Categories D and E may not apply to
your exam, but they are worth looking at for future reference. Category F is about

TIP

Don’t become depressed as
you go through this unit —

most students don’t write like
this most of the time! It’s here
to be a helpful reminder of
what not to do.

 

particular pitfalls encountered with coursework.

A Relevance to the question asked

Problem

1 Not answering the question, for
whatever reason.

Writing another essay, perhaps using
familiar material which is not quite
relevant.

Being mainly relevant but having
passages which drift away from the
main focus.

Focusing on character at the expense of
other features.

5 Not choosing the most suitable
material to illustrate your answer.

Always highlight the key words of

the question and ask yourself if each
paragraph is to the point. Keep checking
back.

You may have done a mock exam with a
similar question. Take care that you use
your known material carefully and in a
focused way. It is hard to omit something
you have revised carefully, but you must
do so if it is not relevant to the question

asked.

Plan and ensure that each paragraph
relates to the question.

Don’t allow a fascinating character to
unbalance your essay. For example, if you
are studying The Return ofthe

Native, students are often obsessed

with the character of Eustacia Vye
(understandably as she is a very
compelling character) and write too much
on her when it is not strictly relevant.

The same is true of Iago in Othello and
Edmund in King Lear.

Don’t, for example, write on poems
which do not really fit the question
asked just because you know them. Be
ready for all possibilities by studying
thoroughly.

 

265Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

B Problems of essay structure

Problem I Tip

1 No clear argument.

2 Repetition of ideas.

  
 
   
  

  
 

 

   

Plan, and use suitable discourse markers
(see Unit 27).

Planning should help this too. Develop
a sense of whether you have made a
particular point before.

3 No introduction, or one which doesn’t See below for an exercise on
introduce any relevant ideas. introductions.

4 No conclusion. Even if you are pressed fortime, try to
sum up what you have argued in your
essay.

 
 
  
  

  

 
 
  
 

 
   

 
   
   
   
 

C Handling the material

' Tip
1 Telling the story. See detailed examples below.

  

Problem

    
     
 
  

 
 

2 Describing ratherthan analysing; See detailed examples below.
paraphrasing.

3 Writing too generally without textual See detailed examples below.
support.

I D Contextual matters

     
    
 
 

 
 

   
 
    

  

1 Over—emphasis on the writer’s life. Details of the writer’s life story are best
avoided altogether. Concentrate on the

text.

   

   
  

  
 
 
 
  

2 Bolt—on paragraphs of historical or Try to incorporate this material relevantly
social material. within paragraphs about literary qualities.

  
 
  

   
  
 
 

3 Forgetting the other contexts, such as
the domestic, cultural and literary.

Many answers consider all 20th century
material to have been affected by the
first and second world wars. This may
seem an easy solution but it is often
irrelevant. ‘Culture’ is notjust history.
Family contexts exist in every era and are
understood by every reader.Unit 34: Troubleshooting

 

 

E Using the critics

Problem I Tip

1 Making sweeping generalisations about Try to remember the name of the critic
critics’ views without naming them. whose ideas you are quoting.

2 Using quotations from critics without Don’tjust put in some words you’ve

thinking. learned. Do you agree/disagree with the
ideas expressed? How have they helped
you to understand the primary text? For
example, when the editor of an edition of
the Wife of Bath ’5 Prologue and Tale says
the Wife of Bath bursts upon the pilgrimage
with the unexpectedness of a bomb, think
carefully before you quote it. It’s easy to
remember, but how entirely apt is this
metaphor? A bomb may be ‘unexpected’
(though not if it’s a war situation) and it’s
totally destructive — is this true of the Wife?

3 Relying on the words of one critic so Some critics can be very persuasive in
that your own personal response is their views. It is a good idea to read other
smothered. points ofview as well to get a balance of

opinion, and of course your own personal
response is even more important.

 

F Particular coursework essay pitfalls

I If you are choosing your own title, try not to be too ambitious. You haven’t got 267
enough time to discuss the whole of American drama in the second half of the
20th century, but you have got time to do a close analysis of some plays which
were written then.

I Dwelling 0n the writer’s life can easily become biography rather than literary
criticism, so be sparing with these details, which, used selectively, can be helpful
as contextual background.

I Related to this, trying to work out the writer’s intentions is unproductive. (This
has been called ‘the intentional fallacy’.) What matters is what has been written
in your texts and what eifects this has.

I Characters being Viewed as real people, rather than as constructs of the author,
is a danger to be avoided at all costs.

I Always discuss and analyse — don’t just illustrate!

I Make sure your paragraphs develop an argument and are linked carefully with
discourse markers.

More on B: Problems of essay structure
Introductions

ACTIVITY 34.1

Look at the following examples of introductions and discuss in class which
is the most effective. If you ﬁnd yourself being critical of one, justify your
feelings to the class and see whether you could improve it.

Essay title: In what ways, and with what eﬁects, does the novel Americanah
present the time frame of the narrative?Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

introduction 1

introduction 2

Americanah is a novel which crosses three continents and many lives. However, it
is not told in a chronological way, and the reader moves backwards and forwards in
the lives of the main characters.

introduction 3

I am going to write about the different time frames of the novel. I will then write
about the main characters’ youth and their older selves. I will consider the writer’s
methods.

introduction 4

The love story of Ifemelu and Obinze is a long and complex one. Americanah does
not present the story in a chronological way, but moves backwards and forwards,
focusing at times on their youth, at times on their mature adult selves, and taking a
narrative point of View focalised ﬁrst on one and then on the other, as young people
and as more mature people, against a social and political backdrop. This allows a
wide range of points of View, giving the novel scope for historical and sociological

a comment as well as exploration of characters and relationships.
I.
E The ﬁrst example is simply a biographical introduction which is
g irrelevant to the essay. NEVER begin an essay in this way._Could you
8 salvage it at all or would it be best to start again? The second is apt and

focused but a little sketchy. Could you say something useful to add to it?
The third is a statement of intention rather than an introduction to the
ideas of the title (and rather dull in its expression). The fourth covers

a lot of ground and is effective because it moves away from simply
character towards the social and political background of the novel,
which is just as affected by time as the characterisation is.

whole essay narrating the plot is very unusual. Nonetheless, there are moments in
essays where telling part of the story creeps in: for example, when that part of the
story seems really important, or where critical ideas are fading and it may seemUnit 34: Troubleshooting

 

(Introduction): Blindness is a very important theme in King Lear, both physically
and metaphorically. Gloucester is literally blinded in a horrifying scene where
the elder daughters of Lear and Cornwall show their cruelty. But both Lear
and Gloucester are metaphorically blind too, to the wickedness of their elder
children and the goodness oftheiryounger ones, whom they have banished.
(Ist paragraph in the main body): in the first scene of the play, King Lear
holds a love test to determine which of his daughters love him most, so that he
can divide the kingdom between them. Goneril first and then Regan tell him
that they love him excessively. Goneril says  and then Regan tries to out—do
her by saying  and then Cordelia, who has always been Lear’s favourite 
Lear becomes very angry at this and she is banished from the kingdom, though
the King of France says he wishes to marry her and is unaffected by Lear’s angry
actions.

 

/

What to do here to avoid storytelling

What is in Act 1 Scene 1 that is relevant to the essay title? If you look at the text in
detail, you’ll remember Goneril uses the phrase dearer than eye—sight which would
be a useful ironic reference (proleptic irony), but more important are the words
spoken by Lear’s loyal and outspoken retainer Kent, drawing attention to Lear’s

folly:

LEAR: Oat ofmy sight!
KENT: See better, Lear; and let me still remain / The true blank 0fthine eye.

So it is possible to refer relevantly to this scene without telling the story.

The second example is from the middle of an essay on Emma about Emma learning
and becoming more mature. The essay has already discussed Emma’s interference
in the life of Harriet Smith and her own shock at being proposed to by Mr Elton.
The essay is going on to discuss Emma’s mistaken assumptions about Iane Fairfax
and Frank Churchill.

 

(Main body): Emma shares her suspicions about Jane’s love life with Frank
Churchill, who encourages her in them and, in fact, makes some quite open
hints and insinuations himself. When a piano arrives in Highbury as a gift for
Jane, it is thought to be from the Campbells.

Frank, however, suggests that it is a gift from Mr Dixon, a gift to show his
continuing affection for her even after his marriage to her friend. Jane’s
response is one of confusion, suggesting that it may indeed be a gift from a
secret admirer.

 

 

269Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

What to do here to avoid storytelling

There are useful points to be made here about Emma, Jane and Frank Churchill.
Emma is ﬂattered by Frank Churchill’s attentions to her and continues to make
unfounded assumptions about others — here, apparently, lane Fairfax. The text
suggests the latter’s discomfort and confusion, but Emma plunges on wilfully and
blindly. In a kind of double irony, Frank Churchill’s own collusion with Emma’s
misunderstanding is because he himself has a secret relationship with Jane and is
trying to create a smokescreen so that people won’t suspect what’s going on between
them. So you avoid telling the story by focusing on the themes of arrogance and
misunderstanding, the characterisation of the three characters involved, and

the continuing ironies exploited by the novelist in her development of Emma’s
education.

2 Describing rather than analysing

Describing is a little like telling the story, saying what qualities something has,
rather than analysing. It may take the form of paraphrase, which means putting the
passage into your own words; again, not analysis. A common ﬂaw in essays on The
Wife of Bath’s Prologue and Tale is to describe the Wife’s ﬁrst four marriages before
getting to the analysis of the important ﬁfth one.

ACTIVITY 34.2

It little proﬁts that an idle king,

By this still hearth, among these barren crags,
Matched with an aged wife, I mete and dole
Unequal laws unto a savage race,

That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me.

I cannot rest from travel: I will drink

Life to the lees: all times I have enjoyed
Greatly, have suffered greatly, both with those
That loved me, and alone; on shore, and when
Through scudding drifts the rainy Hyades
Vexed the dim sea: I am become a name;

For always roaming with a hungry heart
Much have I seen and known; cities of men
And manners, climates, councils, governments,
Myself not least, but honoured of them all;
And drunk delight of battle with my peers,
Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy.

Tennyson UlyssesEXAMPLE 3

Unit 34: Troubleshooting

 

Ulysses is a famous classical hero, also called Odysseus, who was away from
home (lthaca) for about twenty years, ﬁghting at Troy before journeying home
and having various adventures en route. Tennyson shows him as someone
who longs for further adventures and is dissatisfied with the domestic life
and duties of a king. He wants to live fully, to drink life to the lees which means
to drink his wine right down to the dregs and leave nothing in the glass. He
dreads having a dull life where he does nothing: to rust unburnished, not to
shine in use. Tools and weapons rust when they are not used, but they shine
when they are polished for use. He wants more adventures, even though

he is old: this grey spirit yearning in desire; he doesn’t want to store and

hoard myself. He doesn’t want to cut himself off and keep himself to himself.
Tennyson is commenting on old age and how many old people don’t want

to slow down, especially if they have had a fulfilling life. They want to keep
having experiences.

 

 

x J

What to do here to avoid description and paraphrase

Omit the introduction to Ulysses: the marker knows the story and the poem. Don’t
explain what drinking life to the lees means: comment on how the metaphor works
and whether it is effective. (What does such a comparison tell us about Ulysses’s
character and habits, for example?) Don’t describe the actions of rust; discuss,
again, what impression it makes that Ulysses compares himself to a sword. Analyse
similarly his comparison of himself to a commodity being kept in a store.

There is, of course, more to say about Ulysses; being more analytical about
the language referred to in this sample could take you back to the poem where
you might notice further points; for example, how important his self image is to
him: I am become a name. The race that he rules know not me; he has been among
the heroes and honoured of them all — these references show his concern for his
reputation. Ironically, becoming a name means that Ulysses is now past history;
his life of dramatic exploits and widespread fame is over. He doesn’t want to hoard
himself — he wants to be out in the open, known to all, still being the main man,
the hero. This dramatic monologue is more revealing of a complex character if the
imagery and tone are examined more closely.

ACTIVITY 34.3

Read this extract from a passage question on Pinter’s play The Homecoming.

 

Halfway through the passage we are introduced to Sam, Lenny’s uncle, and
the interaction between them seems to be quite pleasant. Lenny and Sam
talk. Hullo. How areyou, uncle? Lenny is more friendly when he speaks to his
uncle: Well, I thinkyou’re entitled to be tired, Uncle, after Sam has had a long
day at work. The relationship between Sam and Lenny seems to be more
friendly, whereas the relationship between Sam and Max seems to be more
distant. We see this when Max says: I’m here too, you know, implying that he is
expecting a greeting. However, he does not get one as Sam just looks at him
and does not fully acknowledge him. Sam only says: Iknowyou’re here and

 

there is another pause after this.

271 7Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

What to do here to avoid descriptien and paraptirase

Look closely at this passage of writing. It seems to me that only one point is being
made, with description and repetition. Write one sentence to express this point.
You do not need to labour a point by repetition and description. Analysing the
language and tone is all-important. Usefully here, the tone of the speakers could be
examined more closely. "lhe idea of being entitled to be tired could be expressed in
a sardonic way, which doesn’t suggest friendliness. In what tone does Max say his
line? How does the pause contribute to the atmosphere?

3 Writing too generally without textual support

What you say may be valid, but support from the text is essential to make your
claims convincing.

ACTIVITY 34.4

Read this paragraph from an essay on a drama Unseen.

 

As a theatre piece, l feel this scene is rather effective because there is a lot
ofdetail squeezed in, yet the pauses and silences help draw it out. There is

a lot of action in the piece, most of it unjustified. His [the playwright’s] stage
directions and sound cues help, and the readers feel pathos towards the main
character.

 

¥§hat is; do te support this paragraph ffﬁi’t‘é the text

Examples are needed of: detail squeezed in; pauses and silences; action; and stage
directions and sound cues; and considered evidence of why the reader would feel
sympathy towards the main character. Additionally, the claim that the action is
unjustiﬁed seems inexplicable without further discussion. It is not a successful
paragraph and saying I feel doesn’t enhance it. Considering ‘the readers’ rather
than ‘the audience’ suggests too that awareness of theatrical qualities is not entirely
secure.

ACTIVITY 34.5

Read the following paragraph from an essay on Keats and beauty, which has
more to say than the paragraph above yet still fails to support its ideas from
the text.Unit 34: Troubleshooting

 

 

La Belle Dame Sans Merci is written within a framework of the cruelty of
nature, The knight is lost and it is evident that he has no purpose to his life. In
the centre ofthe poem there is a moment of intense beauty and the language
becomes rich and erotic. Howeverthe moment ends and the knight is left
alone. Keats leaves the reader with the idea of how to reconcile a moment

of beauty with brutal reality. When it is over you are once again in a world of
suffering.

 

What to do to support this paragraph from the text

Whether you know the poem or not, you can see that the ideas remain general

and vague. The following points could be illustrated and discussed: framework;
nature’s cruelty; the knight’s purposelessness; the moment of beauty with language
becoming rich and erotic (we would only know that a woman is involved from the
poem’s title!); the juxtaposition of beauty and suffering. Some evidence of the verse
form could be useful here too.

TIP

Under timed conditions when you do not have a text to hand, it is acceptable to
illustrate indirectly. If you can’t remember the exact quotation, refer as directly as
you can to the images you remember. Looking at the example above, you could

say that no birds are singing and the vegetation is bare because summer is over;

the knight is wretched; the lady is like a fairy’s child and moans with love for him;

she gazes at him and sighs with love, but he is soon left on the cold hillside. These 273 '7
would all show a close familiarity with the poem. Ifyou are studying Keats, find

exact quotations from the poem to illustrate these points.

 

l
.W“ _.__ _...i..___ . V.