Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

Unit 30: Unseen comparisons

If you are doing an Unseen Paper at an advanced level, you may be required to
compare and contrast two poems or two passages of prose. Occasionally, mixed
form Unseens are given. (You have an example of a Poem/Prose Unseen in Unit 24.)

When you come to write your comparison, you are faced with a choice of essay
structures. Are you going to talk about poem A ﬁrst and then bring in poem B? Or
are you going to try to comment on both simultaneously as you go through your
paragraphs? Bear in mind that the instruction given is to ‘compare’ or ‘compare
and contrast’, so you must be seen to be answering the question from the word
go. (‘Compare and contrast’ is a favourite formula — it just means discuss the
similarities and differences. Even if you just have the word ‘compare’, you should
still also contrast.)

How to choose: The best way is the way which works for you, so that you are
able to write your most conﬁdent essay. There are advantages and possible pitfalls in
each method.

Method 1.

I An introduction, with reference in general terms to both poems/passages —
perhaps to a similar theme or subject matter.

I The main body of the essay is organised thematically, with a topic for each

I paragraph that refers to both poems/passages and compares them from the

outset (for example, use of extended metaphor, complex repetitive structure,
verse form/rhyme, and so on).

I A conclusion which sums up the comparative argument.

The advantage of this more sophisticated method is that the whole essay is

relevant to the comparison; its main disadvantage is that some students ﬁnd the
continuously interweaving reference to both texts confusing and the essay structure
becomes muddled. For these students, Method 2 may be advisable.

WW Method 2
T", N} I An introduction, with reference in general terms to both poems/passages —
35 Create a table for comparison perhaps to a similar theme or subject matter. (The same as Method 1.)
of poems or prose passages l The ﬁrst paragraph of the essay deals with the ﬁrst poem/passage, referring to
using this method. It can be all the elements of language, structure, tone, and so on. The next paragraph
3 Very helpful. deals with the second poem/passage, comparing with the ﬁrst as it goes, and
KMWWWMWAWM»WW«wmwmm’j from that point on, the essay is entirely comparative. It is possible to move from

one piece to the other in successive paragraphs, but you must give equal weight
to each and you must compare and contrast.
I A conclusion which sums up the comparative argument.

under control, dealing ﬁrst with one and then with the other, making comparative
interpretations and evaluations only as you get into the second poem/passage. The
disadvantage of this method is that you might get carried away with poem/passage A
and then not write much about poem/passage B; or forget to compare and write two
almost separate mini—analyses with very little comparison.