Unit 1: Introduction to poetry

 

Section 1: Poetry 1

Unit 1: Introduction to poetry

Responding to poetry and writing about it

This section of the book will help you to express your thoughts and feelings about
poetry. The units on this topic are designed to help you to enjoy poetry to the full
and to feel more secure about expressing your responses, formulating your own
interpretations and supporting your ideas with examples.
Poetry can stretch words to their limit to record unique, direct impressions
of experience. A word can achieve its full potential when a skilled poet combines
it with other carefully selected words. The elements of a word — its meaning,
associations, context, history, sound, even its shape and length — all combine with
other words to produce the distinctive qualities of a poem. No wonder that many
writers see poetry as the ultimate achievement of any language, the utterance that
can never really be translated without losing some of its magic. Read any poem
aloud to savour its sounds and rhythms; critical appreciation will follow with
practice.
All syllabuses focus on a very important Assessment Objective that reminds
5. us that every writer chooses forms, structures and words to shape meanings. Both
the writer selecting the words and the reader absorbing their effects are important
in this process. You are the reader, whose close listening and reading, personal
experience and enjoyment are most signiﬁcant for your appreciation. You may 1
ﬁnd that you observe and give emphasis in a different way from your classmate.
Providing that both of you can express your feelings, identify the evidence from
4 the poem you are discussing and argue your case, then neither of you is wrong,
necessarily. Both of you are literary critics.

“Ia-L; r" ' “‘

What makes a poem?

ACTIVITY 1.1

Discuss with your group,
or teacher if possible, what
qualities you think a poem
should have in order to

be deﬁned as a poem, and
make a list.

Here’s a table for you, which shows where various points are discussed
in the following Poetry units. You may have come up with some of these
points in your discussion about the qualities that deﬁne poems.

COMMENT

      
  

  
 
 

Possible qualities of a poem Where these are discussed

A Reading a poem out loud can be
very exciting/thrilling/funny/sad

even if you don’t understand all of
it completely.

 
    
  

  
 
 
 

Later in Unit 1

  

B It is usually ‘about’ something — a
theme; but it doesn’t have to tell a
story.

 
   
  

   
 
 

  

C The writer is expressing her/his Later in Unit 1
thoughts on a particular subject so
it can be full of humour or emotion

such as anger or sadness.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

  

  
  

  

D The meaning can sometimes be Unit 2

difficult at first reading because:

- the words aren’t in the usual
order

- some of them even seem to be
missing

- they appearto be new words not
in the dictionary, or don’t have
their usual meaning

- the language is concentrated or
ambiguous.

 
 
      
   
   
   
 
   
    
  

  
  

  
 
  
  

  

E The language can have lots
of figures of speech (such as
metaphor and personification) and
be very descriptive.

F Sometimes words or phrases or
ideas are repeated.

‘ G It is written in lines and the
sentences don’t reach the end of
the page.

Unit2
Unit3

 
   
 

    
     

   
   
 
 
 

   
     

Unit3

Unit4 and 5

Of all the points in the list, it’s probably D, with its range of challenges
for readers, that worries students the most, especially when they have
never studied poetry before or are looking at a poem for the ﬁrst

time. Try not to be too worried about what you see as difﬁculties of
interpretation. Some students spend too much time trying to chase the
‘meaning’ of a poem and forget about the real words that are the poem.
It’s important to remember that the poet has made choices to create
particular effects, and considering these in detail — their sounds, their
rhythm, their combination together — often clariﬁes meaning where it
has seemed tricky.

Then, in Unit 6 you focus on writing for an exam, with two
different examples of questions. Throughout the units you will have
Study and Revision tips. The examples used are from the Literature
texts on Cambridge syllabuses, as well as others that are especially
memorable or appropriate to illustrate particular points.

ACTIVITY 1.2

Look again at the table of qualities that could characterise a poem. How many
of them can be seen in the following short poetic text?

H There is a pattern to the way it
is laid out (e.g. in verses, stanzas or
groups oflines).

  
 

  
  
 

  
 

l Sometimes it is very rhythmical
and there are rhymes or other
sound effects such as alliteration.Unit 1: Introduction to poetry

 

The apparition of these faces in the crowd;
Petals on a wet, black bough.

Ezra Pound In a Station ofthe Metro (1913)

 

At first there do not seem to be enough qualities to make this into a poem

as such. It has only two lines, which are not of the same length; there is no
distinctive rhythm or rhyme and there is not even a verb to give action to the
situation and point to a theme. (Some students think this is too fragmentary
to be classed as a poem and you may have some sympathy with that View.)
But it is a very descriptive fragment and it uses two different images ~ one in
each line — to capture the poet’s experience of seeing people in a crowded
station. (The Metro is the Paris underground system. If you do not have an
underground train system where you live, imagine crowds pouring off a train.)
The poem’s title is important because it places the poet’s observation and
allows the reader to conjure up similar experiences.

The first image is that the faces are an apparition, a word that means
‘appearance’, but also ‘ghost’, suggesting that they do not look like living
beings and perhaps are pale and sad. The second image develops theidea by
the metaphor of their faces being like petals on a wet black bough: perhaps
the poet is suggesting spring when the trees have blooms but no leaves
and the weather is still rainy; the petals are white or pale pink and delicate,
easily blown away. Both images suggest helplessness and transience: there
is nothing substantial or robust in the description at all. So although the poet
has only offered us images, they are suggestive ones, haunting even, and the
experience of seeing people as vulnerable in the hurly-burly of modern urban
life has been communicated in two lines and two evocative images.

K J

W "lhe poem is a good example of Imagism. Ezra Pound was one of a group of poets

. - , i x: called lmagists.
The Imagists were a group of , . . . .
early 20th,century poets who * Here 18 another example of a short poem w1th V1V1d images by Ong Teong Hean.

believed that experience was Tai-chi was originally a training for Chinese martial arts, but is now considered a

most effectively communicated very valuable exercise regime.
through images ofthe

senses and this approach is

an important element in 7

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

 

 

appreciating what a poet is the man oftai-chi
expressing by considering how With such sequestered ease
't is expressed Sense images creates a clean calligraphy
do not have to be metaphors. Ofgraceful peace:

The senses are sight, hearing,

touch, taste and smell; to these a centre Of concentration

we can add the isensez of energy to pump his heart and arteries
or movement) which could be With measured arm-motion
termed the kinetic sense. and steps of gnarled artistry.

Ong Teong Hean The Tai—chi Man (2010)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 1.3

Write down the names of
ﬁve poems you have studied
and in one or two sentences
say what they are about. If
possible, with your partner
or in a group discuss in
more detail how each
theme develops as the poem
progresses.

Stanza is an ltalian word that
means ‘room’, a place to stop.
Poetic stanzas can be irregular
a‘s Weltas regular (see page 18).

What are poems usually about?

Poets can express thoughts and feelings about anything, so poems can have as their
subject matter anything in the world you can think of, like the Underground or
exercising in the morning! There are great poems created about apparently trivial
objects like a lock of hair, insects such as a ﬂea or mosquito, or growing things
such as thistles or mushrooms. Major life dramas such as love, treachery and war
do of course also feature. What the poet does with the subject matter, and how
these ideas are developed, is the poem’s theme, or it can be expressed as ‘the poet’s
concerns’. These ideas are not separate from the words they are expressed in: the
words are the poem.

Your exam syllabus for AS Level does not set longer narrative poems for study,
so all the examples used in this part of the book will be of shorter lyric poems
with distinct themes; you will ﬁnd that length is not necessarily a criterion for
excellence.

Themes in poetry

It is often easier to summarise the theme of a poem than it is to analyse the poet’s
methods and the effects of the language used. This poem is about the waste and
futility of war, you might say, or the sadness of death, or the passage of time, or how
relationships can be difficult, or how some people in power can make others suffer
dreadfully.

Perhaps the poet gives a different example in each stanza and then concludes by
emphasising his point, or uses a little anecdote that illustrates the issue. Or possibly
the poet chooses images which are suggestive of a thought but don’t express the
thought directly, but we still grasp the gist of the argument.

ACTIVITY 1.4

How would you describe the theme of this poem by William Blake? When
you have answered, consider what other elements in the poem could affect the
expression of this theme and your appreciation of it.

My mother groan’d! my father wept.
Into the dangerous world I leapt:
Helpless, naked, piping loud:

Like a ﬁend hid in a cloud.

Struggling in my father’s hands,
Striving against my swaddling bands.
Bound and weary, I thought best

To sulk upon my mother’s breast.

William Blake (1757—1827) InfantSorrowUnit 1: Introduction to poetry

 

 

    

This poem, one ofthe Songs ofExper/ence, presents a newborn baby uttering
its thoughts and feelings, but this infant is very different from the sweet

and innocent baby usually imagined being born into a loving, happy family
environment. The baby is physically weak, but its spirit is already corrupt and
aggressive. The poet may be suggesting that children are not born innocent
and then corrupted by the world as they grow up. Rather, he suggests, they
have an inborn nature which disposes them towards ill temper and sin from
the moment they are born into this ‘dangerous’ world.

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

What is missing from this response?

This answer interprets the theme of the poem quite successfully, but to focus on
theme alone is to neglect other aspects of the poem that inﬂuence the theme very
powerfully. Consider the effect of having the child’s voice as the speaking voice of
the poem — this creates a powerful impression of a character already formed.

Look at the simile Like a ﬁend hid in a cloud and what it suggests about the
devilish and hypocritical potential of the child. The evocative descriptive words
struggling, striving and the verb snlk are linked in sound as well as meaning,
emphasising the child’s hostile, resentful attitude and self-conscious behaviour.
Similarly the words hands and hands rhyme, suggesting by the implication of their
linkage that the hands of the father are restraining rather than lovingly protective.
The concise lines, regular rhythm and rhyme give a conﬁdent certainty to the
meaning and tone of the poem, and are thereby all the more shocking.

In a Station of the Metro, that little fragmentary poem, showed the importance
of style in interpretation. You are reminded similarly by Blake’s poem that the
way a theme is expressed is Vital to its meaning: all the work you do on analysis of
style will help you to reﬁne your ideas about theme and you will be able to return
to your initial statement about the writer’s concerns and make it more subtle and

 

Illustration from William Blake’s
Songs of Innocence and of Experience.

comprehensive.

TIP

The words make the poem: its meaning doesn’t exist as a separate entity
underneath or inside the words like a nut whose shell has to be cracked to find the

kernel inside. lfyou changed some ofthe words to others with similar meanings
but different sounds, the poem would disappear and become something else.

Students usually write about a poem’s theme and say little about the poet’s
style and methods. Any close analysis of the language of a poem will enhance the
quality ofan essay.