Unit 17: Timed drama essays

nit 17: Timed drama essays

In this unit, you’ll study a method for close analysis of a scene or extract to help
you to answer passage questions on plays and also look at a well—structured critical

essay on a play.

Analysis of a passage

There are several elements to consider:

plot and context

themes

characterisation

dramatic action

features of language

use of suitable quotation
possible audience response.

Plot and context

r How is the story, or plot, developed in the passage you are given? Remember
 "a E that, although you will never be expected to tell the story in an AS or A Level
 ne of the commonest essay, it is an essential foundation for all your understanding of, and response to,

‘ istakes is to tell the story the play.
, V the passage or scene, or to

raphrase it (put the words Themes

he passage Into your own ,What major concerns of the work as a whole are developed in the passage? How are

, ,ratherthan notin the . -
onteit ofthe passage inéhe the play’s issues expressed and further explored? Is something new revealed Wthh

lay as a Whole and analysing J affects our appreciation of these issues?

this fits into the wider , .
cture. See Unit 34: CharaCterlsatlon

x

bleShOOtmg for adv'ce on) Are any new characters introduced? If so, how do they ﬁt into the picture so far

nteracting this.
established?
Are your impressions of the other characters added to or modiﬁed further? If so,
what new impressions do we gain?
Is the scene or passage mostly an elaboration of a particular character without
much action?
Are characters spoken of by other characters without appearing themselves? If
so, who? And what does this contribute to our understanding? (This is one of
Shakespeare’s favourite devices, as you have seen.)

I What effect does this have?

n ,, mm

Dramatic action

You may not have seen the play you’re studying, or you may have seen a ﬁlm
version of it. Whether or not you have seen the play, you do need to think about the
dramatic qualities of the scene in question as you read.

Is there any exciting action?

Are there humorous or farcical interchanges between characters?

Does anyone have a soliloquy? If so, what effect does it have at this point?
Where do the climaxes come in the scene?Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

of the scene?
I What would you say by way of advice to the actors playing the parts?

The action is one of the most difﬁcult aspects to consider when you are writing an
essay; you need to use your imagination to understand this aspect well.

Features of language

Although plays are written for performance, they are written in words that have
been chosen by the playwright to evoke emotion, convey thought or present
character. When you are practising for the exam, try to read the dialogue out loud
to a friend to bring it alive. Shakespeare was a poet as well as a dramatist, and close
attention to his language is essential if you are to appreciate the signiﬁcance of what
is happening. Amy Herzog’s After the Revolution is so naturalistic that you can
forget how subtly the playwright introduces her concerns.

First of all, with the help of your teacher or a good edition of the play that
has helpful notes, try to tease out any parts in the passage that are difﬁcult. Then
consider questions like these:

I What unusual words, imagery and descriptive language are used and by which

character? *7,
I If the passage is from a comedy, are there any ‘wit combats’ where characters are i ‘
trying to outdo each other in their cleverness? it ‘
I Is it funny?
I Is it passionate or tragic?
I Are there sequences of intensely emotional utterance? a;
I In Shakespeare, has the playwright used poetry or prose for the scene?
I Do songs feature and, if so, what do they add to the atmosphere or themes of E I
the play? :2 I
Use of quotation

Don’t forget to make a note of useful quotations — highlight them so that you can
ﬁnd them easily later when you are working on an essay. Never quote more than
two lines; a few apt words are even better!

Audience response

Audience response is always worth considering. How might an audience react to
this passage? You may have also some thoughts about the response of contemporary
audiences at the time of, for example, Shakespeare.

ACTIVITY 17.1

Read the following short sequence from Act 1 of A Midsummer Night’s

Dream. This soliloquy by Helena is at the end of the ﬁrst long scene. Analyse it
using the headings above.

HELENA: How happy some, o’er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But What of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
He Will not know What all but he do know.
And as he errs, doting on Hermia’s eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.

\7Unit 17: Timed drama essays

Things base and vile, holding no quantity,

Love can transpose to form and dignity.

Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind,
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath love’s mind of any judgement taste;
Wings, and no eyes, ﬁgure unheedy haste;

And therefore is love said to be a child

Because in choice he is oft beguiled.

As waggish boys in game themselves forsvvear,
So the boy Love is perjured every where;

For, ere Demetrius looked on Hermia’s eyne,
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine,
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s ﬂight:

Then to the wood will he tomorrow night,
Pursue her; and for this intelligence,

If I have thankes, it is a dear expense;

But herein mean I to enrich my pain,

To have his sight thither, and back again.

ShakespeareA Midsummer Night’s Dream Act 1 Scene 1

INDER

_ evertell the story Plot and context

This is part of the play’s exposition (see page 94). We know that Theseus

“text ofthis Speech) in case and Hippolyta are about to celebrate their marriage and that Egeus

.2 haven’t got the book in has brought his daughter Hermia before the Duke to complain that
ltOfYOU, or don’t know she refuses to marry the man he has chosen for her — Demetrius. She is
 Play very Well. in love with Lysander and once the royal party have left the scene she
and Lysander plot to escape from Athens that night and elope. They
intend to meet in the wood. Helena, who has come onto the scene, is
Hermia’s best friend from childhood, and has the unfortunate situation
of being madly in love with Demetrius, who used to love her until he
saw Hermia and now spurns her. When she hears what the lovers are
intending she decides to let Demetrius know, hoping it will make him
love her — thoughts which are expressed in this soliloquy.

.—
Z
I.”
2
2
O
U

Themes

This soliloquy reﬂects on the main theme of the play: Love. Helena is
thought by others as beautiful as Hermia, but Demetrius doesn’t love
her any more, leading to Helena’s ten-line reﬂection on Cupid, the
god of Love, and his attributes. He is blind, so her beauty makes no
difference; he is hasty, lacks any rationality and is ﬁckle, changing his
mind at a moment’s notice. All these ideas will be followed through
in the action of the play, when the lovers get to the forest. Things

base and vile being transformed through love into form and dignity
foreshadows Titania falling in love with the ass. This relatively long
discourse on Love is appropriate here as a prelude to the farcicalCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

to—ings and fro—ings of the lovers in the forest. We are also reminded
that romantic passion supersedes friendship. Helena may have been
Hermia’s friend from childhood, but her passion for Demetrius is more
important than loyalty to her friend!

Characterisation

  

Helena is clearly overwhelmed by her love for Demetrius if she is
prepared to betray her friend’s trust. Thinking he will love her for
telling him is somewhat unrealistic, but she shows all the hopefulness of 

an unrequited lover. Her reﬂections on Love lift this part of her speech :

into a mode which is more like a chorus — what she says is general truth,

the sort of thing a chorus would say, rather than an individual. But as

an individual it shows her to be thoughtful and intelligent, as well as :
full of feeling. ' . ;

Dramatic action

What this sequence does is to prepare us for dramatic action, since what
Helena intends to do will clearly precipitate drama in the forest later,
exacerbated by the actions of Oberon and Puck.

Features of language

The beginning and end of the speech tell us of her intentions, hoping
her action will win her love from Demetrius again. But the central part
H of the speech is a ten-line reﬂection on Love and its qualities, using the
classical ﬁgure of blind Cupid, the boy god of love, whose image can
still be found on Valentine cards even in the 21st century. The language
emphasises his immature nature: and therefore is Love said to be a child.
He is just a boy; his blindness and haste remind us how quickly one
can fall in love with someone, and often someone quite unsuitable. The
whole speech is in rhyming couplets (aabb throughout), which suits well
the chorus—like comments made by Helena here (As waggish boys in
game themselves forswear; / So the boy Love is perjur’d every where).

A vivid weather metaphor is used by Helena to describe what
happened when Demetrius’s aﬁections shifted from her to Hermia. First
he hail ’d down oaths t0 Helena, but the heat from Hermia melted the
hail, so he dissolved and changed his affections.

 

Use of quotation

Any of the descriptions of the boy Cupid and his childish behaviour
would be helpful here, as would the hail/ heat metaphor at the end.

Audience response

We may sympathise with Helena for her unrequited love and accept
that her decision to ‘tell’ on her friend is a theatrical convention to
invite complication and further action.Unit 17: Timed drama essays

ACTIVITY 17.2

The following short scene comes from A Man for All Seasons by Robert Bolt.
Use the same method to analyse the different aspects of the sequence.

MORE: Where are they?
Enter Margaret and Roper

MARGARET: Here, Father.

MORE: [regarding them, resignedly] Good morning,
William. It’s a little early for breakfast.

ROPER: [solidly] I haven’t come for breakfast, sir.

More looks at him and sighs.

MARGARET: Will wants to marry me, Father.

MORE: Well, he can’t marry you.

ROPER: Sir Thomas, I’m to be called to the Bar;

MORE: [warmly] Oh, congratulations, Roper!

ROPER: My family may not be at the Palace, sir, but in the
City —

MORE: The Ropers were advocates when the Mores were
selling pewter; there’s nothing wrong with your
family. There’s nothing wrong with your fortune —
there’s nothing wrong with you — [sourly] except
you need a clock —

I can buy a clock, sir.

Roper, the answer’s ‘no’. [Firmly] And will be ‘no’
as long as you’re a heretic.

[ﬁring] That’s a word I don’t like, Sir Thomas!

It’s not a likeable word. [Coming to life] It’s not a
likeable thing! ,
[Margaret is alarmed and ﬂom behind More tries to
silence Roper]

The church is heretical! Doctor Luther’s proved
that to my satisfaction!

Luther’s an excommunicate.

From a heretic Church! Church? It’s a shop —
Forgiveness by the ﬂorin! Joblots now in Germany!
 Mmm, and divorces.

[expressionless] Divorces?

Oh half England’s buzzing with that 

Listen, Roper. Two years ago you were a
passionate Churchman; now you’re a passionate
— Lutheran. We must just pray, that when your
head’s ﬁnished turning your face is to the front
again.

Robert BoltA Man forA/l Seasons (1960)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

p...
2
Lu
2
E
O
U

 

Plot and context

This sequence comes from relatively early in the play and adds little to
the plot. It is a scene of family life, with Roper asking for Margaret’s
hand in marriage — they have evidently been out very late, as we hear
the clock chiming three just before this dialogue starts. Thomas greets
him kindly, if wearily, and does not scold Margaret for being with him
so late. More refuses to grant Margaret’s hand to Roper because he is a
‘heretic’ and at this point inﬂuenced by Luther’s ideas.

Themes

Although apparently a domestic scene with no importance to the main
action of the play, More’s clear—cut opposition to the marriage because
of Roper’s religious position is a foreshadowing of his ﬁrm refusal to
countenance King Henry’s divorce. He knows his mind and he will not
be swayed. Roper’s wavering — he changes his mind easily on religious
matters — suggests the turmoil the church will shortly be subjected to.

 

Henry Vlll and Anne Boleyn.gm TERMS

is a series ofthree. ,r
irds, phrases, or

hich can be very" .
in both speech and

This pattern of headings
‘ hould not be followed

passage question. They

ejust to help you to

ganise your thoughts and
would naturally be invisible
within the final essay. It is
particularly important that
you don’t waste time setting
the scene or telling the story
to this point. However don’t

7

f<l3rgetthe importance of
c

Unit 17: Timed drama essays

Characterisation

Roper is eager to show that he has prospects as far as his work is
concerned and that his family is respectable. He becomes passionate
when he speaks of Luther and his criticisms of the Church. Mentioning
divorces is provocative. More is resolute and ﬁrm, as he will be
throughout the play. He speaks warmly of Roper’s work prospects

and his family, but is adamant when it comes to religious matters. His
uncompromising nature is made clear in this sequence. Margaret is
conciliatory.

Dramatic action

Roper’s increasing excitement when he speaks of religious matters will
be reﬂected in his action and gesture. Margaret is trying to hold him
back physically, meanwhile, so that he does not anger her father — he

is, after all, supposed to be asking for her hand in marriage. All the
passion in the world will not sway More, however. The actor playing the
part should seem ﬁrm, resolute and unbending here: kindly in personal
matters but entirely unbending in religious ones. Margaret says little
but her actions show that she knows both of them well.

Features of language

More uses a tricolon to speak out his support of Roper: there’s nothing
wrong with yonrfamily. There’s nothing wrong with yonrfortnne — there’s
nothing wrong with you, followed by the humorous anticlimax — except
you need a clock. Roper is suitable except for one, to More, extremely
important thing.

Roper’s passionate language in speaking about the Catholic Church
becomes more poetic, using alliteration: forgiveness by the ﬂorin; Iohlots
now in Germany.

The tone of the dialogue becomes more impassioned with Roper’s
exclamations, but More remains relatively calm, and he refuses to be
drawn when Roper mentions divorce. The stage direction expressionless
gives the hint to the actor.

Use of quotation

Any of the lines quoted above would be useful. Hie playwright gives
frequent indications to the actor for tone of voice, which are worth
mentioning.

Audience response

At this point in the play the audience could be amused by More’s
words to Roper and the physical action of Roper and Margaret trying
to restrain him. But the scene is serious in its foreshadowing of future
conﬂicts.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Writing a critical essay on a play

Look carefully at Unit 27 and remind yourself of the importance of writing a Well~
structured essay. "

ACTIVITY 17.3

Read the essay below on Macbeth. You do not need to have studied this play to '
appreciate its clear structure. If you have studied the play, you will have other
ideas about the topic that this particular essay did not include. For example,
you may want to have said more about Banquo’s ghost. However, this is an
important reminder of the multiple possibilities for selecting material from
complex texts to create an argument in answer to a question. As long as you
can support your points with close textual reference, your opinion is valid. 1

 

What is the importance of the supernatural in Macbeth in your opinion?

Macbeth is a play filled with supernatural events and references and the
supernatural is clearly a very important aspect of the dramatic effect of the
play on the audience. At the time that Shakespeare was writing, the audience
would have been more superstitious than we are today, but a modern
audience is still fascinated by the supernatural aspects of the play, which
emphasise its themes and characterisation.

The first important feature ofthe supernatural is the way in which the
disorder in the kingdom is mirrored in the stormy weather and strange
behaviour of animals on the night when Duncan is murdered. Strange
screams ofdeath were heard, and the earth was feverous and did shake. The
sky became unnaturally black: dark night strong/es the travelling lamp and
Duncan’s horses turned Wild in nature  as they would make war With mankind ,
and began to eat each other. These completely unnatural and alarming ‘
events are symbolic of the way in which the murder of the king will affect the
kingdom. It was believed that a king had a sacred right to rule and his death
would have major repercussions on society, symbolised by the supernatural
events in nature and the cosmos.

But the supernatural is also used to show that Macbeth himself is notjust
a murderer, but a man with a vivid imagination. Just before doing the terrible
deed of murdering the king, he sees a dagger floating in the air in front of him,
drawing him onward to clothe murder. it is possible that this is not a ghostly
dagger but a dagger of the mind, a false creation, / Proceeding from the heat-
oppressed brain, a weapon which has gouts ofblood on its handle. Whether
supernatural or not, what it does remind us is that Macbeth does not find it
easy at this point to be the hard, unfeeling man murdering to advance his
career. He seems genuinely overwrought and has, in the scene before, even
had second thoughts about doing the murder at all, which Lady Macbeth soon
overturns by her powerful persuasions.

Lady Macbeth may indeed be persuasive, but she is a human woman of
apparently strong character, not a supernatural agent. Possibly the most
memorable and striking examples of the supernatural in the play are the three
witches, who also persuade Macbeth, but they use riddling and ambiguous
statements to do so. Their scene opens the play, immediately arousing a
sense of curiosity in the audience as to why they have singled Macbeth out,

>i
<
m,
U)
u.|
in
_l
D.
2
<.
miUnit 17: Timed drama essays

especially when in the next scene he is praised for his valour, loyalty and
nobility. They represent evil and overturn the values of goodness; they make
this clear when they say Fair is foul and foul is fair. The audience gets a shock
when the first words of Macbeth seem to echo this statement: 50 foul and fair
a day/have notseen — a verbal echo which seems to link him mysteriously
with the witches and prepares us for the effect they will have on his stability.

The witches’ meeting with Macbeth influences him profoundly. Because
they promise him that he will be Thane of Cawdor and King thereafter and
he is immediately and unexpectedly given the first title, his mind starts to
churn, imagining the possibility of becoming king. Although he does have
some misgivings at different points, he starts to plan to murder Duncan and
make the witches’ prophecy happen. He describes their words as supernatural
soliciting, but who actually suggested the deed of murder? They did not tell
him to make it happen, theyjust said he would be king, and fate might give
him the throne without him lifting a finger. But his own ambition and his wife’s
strong prompting lead him along the fateful path that will end eventually with
his own death. The witches may represent supernaturally those events in life
which unexpectedly knock us off course and lead us to making the wrong
decisions. On the stage they are terrifyingly evil and influential.

Another very dramatic example of the supernatural is the apparitions
conjured up when Macbeth visits them later, having murdered Banquo to
prevent his children becoming king as the witches had also promised. But the
apparitions only confirm that the issue of Banquo will be kings and his will
not. Moreover, they give him prophecies that are true but so ambiguous that
he misunderstands them (that Birnam Wood will move to Dunsinane before
he will be caught; that he will die at the hand ofone not born of woman). This
suggests the way in which we make assumptions about the future on the basis
of misunderstandings.

Ultimately, the presence of the supernatural in the play is part ofthe
framework of good and evil upon which it is structured, and which is reflected
in the language, with mentions ofdeeds, angels, darkness and light. There is
supernatural goodness at work too, in the English king who has the gifts of
healing and prophecy. The ghost we see — Banquo attending the feast — was a

‘ good man whose spirit is haunting the guilty Macbeth, one of the most exciting
moments in the play. But the real interest of the play lies in the character of
Macbeth himself, who is notjust an ambitious butcher, as he is described at the
end, but an imaginative and intelligent man who could perhaps have chosen

k good, but is persuaded into evil by his wife and the three weird sisters.

 

An interesting aspect of the essay’s structure is that it doesn’t go
through the play chronologically — in other words, starting with the
witches at the beginning. The witches are the main point in the essay
and are left to the climax, just before the conclusion. In Part 2 of this
book you will ﬁnd different ways of handling the same question, all of
which are equally valid, as there is no such thing as a model answer in
this subject. This essay reveals a sense of theatre too, which is important
in a drama essay.

COMMENT

The next section of the book takes you on to more advanced work — Good Luck!

 

J