Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

   

A story is not just a series of events; how these are arranged and communicated is
very important to the effect the novel or short story has on the reader. The plot may
be complicated in a novel, but telling this story or summarising the narrative is not
considered to be an important skill in exams at more advanced level.

 

Plot is the series of events and
actions that-occur in a story.

Chronological means following
the order of events as they

actually happen. Chronological arrangement

 

TIP

Never t9“ the Story Of a  ﬁnal event, as it happened. You might do this if you were describing a car accident
n'ove“ You will waSte Valuable  to a policeman and trying to be precise. This description can be denoted using
‘ “"le and gam no marks for letters of the alphabet: a followed by b, c, d, e and so on.
domg so. The markerofyour I , I . . . I
g essay knows the Story We“ 7 Some novels and short stories are written in this way. At no time Is there
and does not want to hear it ; any irregularity in such works: events happen in the order in which they would
3 occur in real life. If events go from A to Z without deviation, then this may
 create an atmosphere of regularity and completeness: the story proceeds evenly
throughout. Many light novels, intended for whiling away an afternoon in a not
very challenging way, are written in such a manner. The ‘airport novel’ is called this
n because it is something for reading on the beach or on holiday and tossing aside
when it is ﬁnished. It is more difﬁcult to see what people are reading these days as
they use electronic readers — a pity for people like English teachers who are always
interested in what the world is reading!

 

 

more complex in their structure than this. Every time a writer begins the story in
the middle and then goes back to an earlier point in the hero’s life, or a character

 

0f the novel as a whole.

If possible, recount to a friend an interesting incident that happened to you
one weekend. Tell the events in the order in which they actually happened.
Then try beginning with the climax of the story and working back to the
start. Now see if you can pick an incident from the middle of the story and
work backwards to the start and forward to the end. What effect does each
method of structuring your story have on your narrative?

of the suggested ways than others. A dramatic story with tension and a
climax may be spoilt if you know the ending ﬁrst.

COMMENTUnit 9: The novel — structure

 

Non-chronological arrangement

Order: putting Z first

In the novel The Unbearable Lightness of Being by Milan Kundera, the reader is
told almost straight away that the central characters, a young couple, are killed in

id is an accident. Everything that follows about their earlier life together is coloured by
tmay the reader’s knowledge of their untimely deaths. This has a poignant effect on the
5 not reader, who can never forget for a moment the ﬂeeting nature of their physical and

emotional lives, so vividly portrayed by the writer, but doomed to end early. If you
know Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet, you will remember that the Chorus

tells us in the ﬁrst moments of the play that the lovers are star—cross’d and take
their life, with similar effect. We appreciate the intensity and liveliness of the fated
characters much more than we would do if they were to live to an old age and die
wrath/e takes place in their beds. The novel The White Tiger by Aravind Adiga begins at the end, with
metimes the finding‘mc the ﬁrst—person narrator gradually getting to the point of telling his story. This may
éhuscnpt or a letter, for give the effect of a frame device, a favourite literary method used in poetry as well
inple. * as prose (Keats’s The Eve of St Agnes, for example) and in memory plays, discussed

A on page 96 in Unit 14 of this book. It is a metaphor which comes from framing a
painting and as a frame improves alpicture, a framing device helps to enhance the
main narrative. An example is The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Robert

  

e device means giving an
ive the same beginning r»
nd, within which the ,5

    
      
 
  

ie
int

Louis Stevenson.

Changing the order completely

61
ACTIVITY 9.2

s ’ Read the following passages from The Third Policeman by Flann O’Brien
and work out what the order of the events was, using a, b, c and so on. Try to
consider the eﬂect of this.

his

Not everybody knows how I killed old Phillip was he who told me to bring my spade. He was the
Mathers, smashing his jaw in with my spade; but ﬁrst one who gave the orders on the occasion and also the
it is better to Speak of my friendship with John Divney explanations when they were called for.

because it was he who ﬁrst knocked old Mathers down I was born a long time ago. My father was a strong
by giving him a great blow in the neck with a special farmer and my mother owned a public house.

bicycle—pump which he manufactured himself out
Of a hollow iron bar. Divney was a strong civil man
but he was lazy and idle—minded. He was personally
responsible for the whole idea in the ﬁrst place. It

Flann O’Brien The Third Policeman (1968)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

I.
2
DJ
E
2
O
U

 

The events that take place in this extract could be ordered like this:

a birth

b friendship with Divney

c the idea 
d Divney knocked old Mathers down a
e smashing the jaw in

f the explanations

But they are arranged in the following order: e, b, d, b, c, f, a. The
impression created is of a conversation where the ideas are repeated

and events do not always come out in the right order. The character
speaking sounds as if he takes after his father for strength and has spent
much time at his mother’s, having many stories to tell of his exploits!

In The Collector, a novel by John Fowles, a young woman is kidnapped. The ﬁrst i  '
section of the story is a ﬁrst-person narrative told by the girl, describing what
happens to her. There is a sudden shift in the second section of the novel and the
same events are told by the kidnapper, also in the ﬁrst person. The ﬁnal section

Ambiguity and the irony that
springs from it are among the
most significant effects in
literature.

?:;Wmmmm ; Frequency: a single event told several times
i
5
3

«umrkmmvmxwmmw

 

WWW

T“ returns to the girl’s point of View. This has the effect at ﬁrst of involving the
n W reader’s imagination and empathy with the girl, then creating a profound shock
, ‘ r by involving us in the inner life of the kidnapper, enhanced by the use of the
Ambigmty means’bemgppen: ,- ﬁrst-person narrative twice over. When we return to the girl’s viewpoint in the

to more than one meanin or . . .
. . . g. third section, we feel a sense of hopelessness because we know, With the beneﬁt of
Interpretation. Different pomts .

ofview create irony What one hindsight into the kidnappers mind, that she will never escape.

character sees as good may be In Emily Bront'é’s Wuthering Heights, the same narratives are told by different
disastrous for another, so irony characters, creating a richly complex effect. Different points of View of the same
is ineVltable events help to develop the characterisation of Heathcliﬁ" and Catherine, as well as

Nelly Dean, one of the narrators, with her commonsense View of events. Bronte
sometimes delays the second telling of an incident so that our initial assumptions,
based on the ﬁrst person’s account, are challenged. This is particularly used

for creating an aggressive image of Heathcliif at ﬁrst, then making him more
sympathetic. It also reminds us that the ‘truth’ is very difﬁcult to deﬁne and
depends upon the person telling the story as well as the person listening or reading.
Similar effects are created in the modern African novels Americanah (Adichie) and
A Grain of Wheat (Ngﬁgi).

Duration of events

Sometimes a novel seems to slow down and at other times speed up. A few years
can pass in one sentence. An apparently brief, chance meeting can take a whole
chapter to describe. Here is a passage from The Secret Agent (1907) by Ioseph
Conrad, describing the murder of Mr Verloc, an event which in real time would
take only a moment or two.Unit 9: The novel — structure

 

ACTIVITY 9.3

Look at the pace of the description of this event and try to identify those
aspects which slow it down.

 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

He was lying on his back and staring upwards. He ( away before a resolute determination to come out

saw partly on the ceiling and partly on the wall the Victorious from the ghastly struggle with that armed

moving shadow of an arm with a clenched hand lunatic. They were leisurely enough for Mr Verloc to

holding a carving knife. It ﬂickered up and down. Its elaborate a plan of defence involving a dash behind the

movements were leisurely. They were leisurely enough table, and the felling of the woman to the ground with

for Mr Verloc to recognise the limb and the weapon. a heavy wooden chair. But they were not leisurely
They were leisurely enough for him to take in the enough to allow Mr Verloc the time to move either

full meaning of the portent, and to taste the ﬂavour hand or foot. The knife was already planted in his

of death rising in his gorge. His wife had gone raving breast.

mad — murdering mad. They were leisurely enough

. Jose h Conrad The SecretA ent 1907
for the ﬁrst paralysing effect of this discovery to pass p g ( )

Conrad repeats the phrase they were leisurely enough again and again.
Ironically the word leisurely itself slows the pace, and the repetitive
structure builds suspense until the climax of they were not leisurely
enough and then it is too late — the knife is in his breast. Conrad’s
technique of focusing on Verloc’s consciousness slows the events down
— one can have many thoughts in just a moment. (Compare this effect
with the use of parallelism and repetition in poetry in Unit 2.)
Contrast this with the opening sentence of A House for Mr Biswus

(1961) by V. S. Naipaul, which covers a number of weeks in two brisk
sentences:

63

COMMENT

Ten weeks before he died, Mr Mohun Biswas, a journalist of
Sikkim Street, StJames, Port of Spain, was sacked. He had
been ill for some time.

The connections in a complex narrative

Sometimes the writer will draw attention to the structural links in the story. The
following passage, which comes from Bleak House (1852—53) by Charles Dickens, is
an example that reveals the vast and seemingly never—ending material the novelist

has at her/his disposal to shape into a novel. The choice will be made to suit her/his
theme.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

What connexion can there be, between the place
in Lincolnshire, the house in town, the Mercury in
powder, and the whereabouts ofJo the outlaw with
the broom, who had that distant ray of light upon
him when he swept the churchyard—step? What

"0 FURTHER READING

Read the short stories you
are studying and work out
their structure. Do they
have a sudden ‘twist’ at the
end where all is revealed, or
not at all? Or do they have
a more gradual revelation
of theme and character,

or a resolution that is
ambiguous?

 

connexion can there have been between many people
in the innumerable histories of this world, who, from

opposite sides of great gulfs, have, nevertheless, been
very curiously brought together?

Charles Dickens Bleak House (1853)

And the novelist is, of course, doing the bringing together. Victorian novelists, of
whom Dickens is one, were very fond of coincidences, not merely to make the plot
more engaging, but also to suggest the complex networks of social connections and
responsibilities that people try to ignore.

At other times structural links are made by the creation of characters who,
placed next to one another, or Juxtaposed, bring out the writer’s concerns very

in the latter case. In Adichie’s Half of a Yellow Sun for example, Ugwu, one of the
three protagonists, is shown growing up against the terrible background of the
Biafran war.

Emma is very carefully constructed, with the main character, Emma, making

resolved when she learns the truth. Characters are introduced at just the right
moments for advancing Emma’s progress, and public events — such as balls
and picnics — punctuate the narrative regularly and helpfully for the reader’s
appreciation of the social setting.

Short story structuresll

   
 

  

 

TIP
When answering passage
questions, make sure that

you considerthe place of the
extract within the novel’s or
story’s structure. Is this one
ofthe many moments when
the heroine/hero is faced

with her/his own mistake

and has to learn to be more
careful? Is this one of the
descriptions ofthe place

that regularly punctuate the
narrative, drawing attention
to a particular theme? Always
try to analyse the writer’s skill
and artistry.

 

Unit 9: The novel — structure

 

 

The film Brokeback Mountain is based on a short story by Annie Proulx.

characters and events, but seen in different timescales and from diiferent points 55
of view. A good example of this is The Turning by Tim Winton (included in the
anthology Stories of Ourselves). Go Down Moses by the American writer William
Faulkner is another. The Wyoming tales of Annie Proulx are a more recent
American example. This allows a kind of novelistic development of character,
theme and language features through individual stories which are complete and
satisfying in themselves too.

Two examples from Stories of Ourselves where there is a ‘twist in the tail’
are Meteor (Iohn Wyndham), a story which has multiple narration too, and An
Englishman’s Home (Evelyn Waugh). Two stories which have a gradual revelation
of the theme are 7716 Third and Final Continent (Ihumpa Lahiri) and Games at
Twilight (Anita Desai).