Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

1 Section 2: Prose 1

 

Unit 7: Studying a novel or short story

W

A narrator is the person who
tells the story 7 not the author.

W

A symbol is a physical object
that represents an idea or
abstract concept. For example,
a heart or rose may
conventionally represent
romantic love.

This section of the book will help you to think about and discuss your prose set
texts, which are likely to be novels or short stories as this is a Literature course. It
will also help you to think critically and analytically about any novel or short story
that you read. In this unit, you will look at narrative approach, themes and settings,
and brieﬂy at whether a particular novel or short story is more concerned with
concrete description or the creation of consciousness. In Unit 8, you will examine
some openings of novels or short stories and what they show. Other units discuss
structure (Unit 9), characterisation (Unit 10), answering a passage question and
writing an essay on a prose work (Unit 11).

Approaching a novel

Every novel is unique, but for each one there will be a writer, of a particular gender
and age, who lived or is living at a particular time and in a particular place. This
individual has ideas and attitudes to life which will be expressed in the novel
because she or he wrote it. For each novel there is a reader too — yo'u — with your
own facts of biography and preference. The text itself has a narrator (or narrators)
to tell the story, a setting or settings, and characters. The novel is written in
language which is structured into sentences, paragraphs and (probably) chapters.

The interaction between these elements creates an incomparable experience for
the reader, an experience that might last over several days or weeks, depending on
the length of the novel and how much time you have to read. Unlike many poems,
which can easily be read at one sitting, a novel becomes part of the very fabric of
your daily life as you snatch a couple of chapters on the bus or before going to sleep.
Sometimes you are fortunate enough to have time to read the whole thing without
interruption, for example when on holiday or recovering from an illness. These
units are designed to help you to express in words your experience of reading and
enjoying a novel, as well as developing a critical framework for appreciating any
other work of prose that you read.

Approaching the short story

Much of what is true of the novel can also be applied to the short story. But

the short story is intended to be read in one sitting, and has much less time to
make an impression. Its setting and characters must be delineated skilfully and
economically, its structure sculpted with great care. It can’t afford to be leisurely in
its approach. In some ways it is similar to a poem; for example, it may use symbols
to elaborate elements of the piece and build skilfully to a climax which sums up the
theme concisely.

Narrative and telling stories

The telling of stories is as old as human society. In the past, many stories were not
recorded in written words but spoken, passed down from one generation to the next
(the oral tradition). Everyone loves stories and much of our conversation consists of
telling other people about our experiences: what happened, who said what and to
whom, and how we felt about it. We listen avidly to others people’s accounts of their
doings. Beyond our own domestic and social world we tune in to the news stories ofier 

y:
“W,”   “3.1),

  . saw. shew. lmmwwmwvw i' :

’33::rwrk'm‘vm kmm . «new. jwnsv‘awln‘ t-l. : we

 

  

'  a .4. «Ma-Mcrwmﬁyvvr'

  

 
 
 
  
   
   
   
  
  
 

 

sm is a movement 7
n‘g in the visual arts, but
plied to writing it means
ng realistic details with
dreamlike images.

comes from a Latin
aning‘mask’ and is the
'eaks in a novel, short
poem: the writer’s own
5 hidden by the mask of
en narrator

Unit 7: Studying a novel or short story

the world, the public narratives. We also create narratives within our own minds,
rehearsing conversations, imagining events and dreaming by day and night.

ACTIVITY 7.1

If possible, tell a partner the story of one of your dreams, or an event which
happened over the weekend. Discuss the potential this has for a short story.
Your dream is likely to be surrealistic, perhaps more difﬁcult to craft into a
short story without a lot of editing.

The narrator

Every narrative has at least one narrator: the person who tells the story. In most
everyday situations, the narrator is easy to spot: she or he is a reporter being her/
himself in an easily deﬁned context. However, in a work of prose ﬁction the writer
chooses a narrator to present her/ his story in a way that will be effective. ﬂiis may
involve writing in her/ his own voice or it may mean adopting the voice of someone
else — a character in the story — or a mixture of both. So any writer may begin as
narrator by using her/ his own voice, then introduces a person to tell the story, a
story in which there are characters who also have their own voices, and who may tell
part of the story, or write a letter or diary. This is known as multiple narration.

In the novel Wuthering Heights (1845—46) by Emily Bronte, the novelist does
not speak in her own voice at all, but uses two very different narrators to tell the
story. Within their telling of the story further characters speak, write letters and
contribute their own points of view. This may sound complicated but it is very
eﬁrective in presenting different views of the same events (and in that sense much

I closer to our own real—life experience where diiferent people take a range of views of

the same event). Another writer who does this very effectively is William Faulkner
in The Sound and the Fury (1929).

First-person narrative

When a character tells the story in the ﬁrst person (‘1’) this is known as ﬁrst—
person narrative. You can say that the writer adopts the persona of that particular
character; so, for example, in Wuthering Heights, Emily Bronte adopts the persona
ﬁrst of Mr Lockwood, then of Nelly Dean. Later, when another character writes

a letter or tells a substantial part of the story, another persona is being used, for
example Isabella.

ACTIVITY 7.2

Find and make a list of some novels written in the ﬁrst person. Identify who
the ‘I’ of the story is. Can you ﬁnd a story where the ‘1’ changes and becomes
another person?

Omniscient narrator

Not all stories are told in the ﬁrst person. Sometimes the narrator’s viewpoint is
that of the writer; if the writer moves from character to character freely, knowing
everybody’s thoughts and feelings and showing that they have all the information
about what has happened and is going to happen, then obviously the narrative isn’t

 

47Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

restricted to one person’s point of View. It is told in the third person (‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’
or ‘they’) and may range widely, seeing all the different parts of the narrative with
WhatE are the advantages equal clarity. This kind of storyteller is known as an omniscient narrator because E
and disadvantages of: they know everything. The word omniscient, meaning ‘all—knowing’, is often used
A the ﬁrst_person narrative to describe God and in a sense this kind of storyteller is god-like; after all, a !
method? character can be born or married or killed at the stroke of a writer’s pen! This

is probably the commonest approach for a writer to adopt and it has been used
successfully for centuries.

B the omniscient narrator?

 

  

When a writer creates a character who tells a story in the first person, the
reader is able to understand and appreciate the innermost thoughts and
feelings ofthat person, often noticing their flaws and idiosyncrasies, as
well as the narrowness oftheir vision of the world. Perhaps what they say
is unreliable, and the reader is given the opportunity by the writer to spot
this, which creates many interesting ironic effects. The omniscient narrator
style, in contrast, gives the possibility of many different perspectives, and
comments across a range of characters and situations.

8 ‘ I 3’  ACTIVITYTJI

0mni$cient~narratof See?
definitionon-th’is'pargefff ~~ *

SAMPLE RESPONSE

  

 

 

Here are two short paragraphs, one from North and South (1855) by Elizabeth

A unreliablé‘riarrator‘ ’s I ’ 7
0:6 whoseviéwgéahd b; fully,  Gaskell, and one from The Great Gatsby (1925) by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Read
trustedfby thereadergpgmaps: , 7 them and see if more than one point of View is being given. In extract 1,

    

try to identify any moments where the narrator seems to know more than
the character does, and is letting the reader know about it. In extract 2, the
narrator of the story, Nick Carraway, is describing his ﬁrst encounter with
Gatsby, who is 50 feet away looking at the stars. Try to identify any moments

or‘doesn’t know everything, or,
is perhaps alliar or exaggerator.

 

You may sometimes ﬁnd‘the‘ where the writer is trying to overcome the disadvantage of having a ﬁrst—
term imperfect" narrator. ' Per 5011 narrator-
l 2
Margaret opened the door and went in with the I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned
straight, fearless, digniﬁed presence habitual to him at dinner, and that would do for an introduction.
her. She felt no awkwardness; she had too much the But I didn’t call to him, for he gave a sudden
habits of society for that. Here was a person come on intimation that he was content to be alone — he
business to her father; and, as he was one who had stretched out his arms toward the dark water in a
shown himself obliging, she was disposed to treat curious way, and, far as I was from him, I could have
him With a full measure of civility. Mr Thornton was sworn he was trembling.

a good deal more surprised and discomﬁted than she.
Instead of a quiet middle—aged clergyman, — a young

lady came forward with frank dignity, — a young lady
of a different type to most of those he was in the habit
of seeing.

F. Scott Fitzgerald The Great Gatsby (1925)

Elizabeth Gaskell North and South (1855)Unit 7: Studying a novel or short story

 

 

1 First of all, there are two characters and we are shown the thoughts of
both of them. (This would be impossible if Margaret were telling the story
in the first person — how would she know that Mr Thornton was not used
to seeing young women like her?) The narrator seems more interested
in Margaret than Mr Thornton, at least at this point in the story. Some of
what Gaskell writes shows Margaret’s own thoughts and consciousness of
herself, but there are moments when Gaskell gives the reader more about
Margaret than the character knows herself: is she aware, for example
that she is straight, fearless and dignified, and that this is ‘habitual to
her’? Probably not. She does know that she feels no awkwardness, and
that she wants to treat him with a full measure of civility, but then frank
dignity seems to be the writer again, making sure that we know clearly
how Margaret is behaving. It is possible, therefore, forthe writer to use the
omniscient narrator method and still get close to the innermost thoughts
ofa character.

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

2 Fitzgerald’s presentation of Nick’s character seems from this short
passage to suggest he is friendly and also tactful. His description of
Gatsby shows him to be sensitive and observant. It is central to the novel
that the main character, Gatsby, who is not the narrator, is watched and
described by someone, the narrator Nick, who is observant, otherwise
how would the reader find out about him? However, Fitzgerald makes
sure that the disadvantage of the single viewpoint is lessened by adding
in some observation for us that goes further than Nick’s viewpoint. Would
it be possible to see someone trembling if they were 50 feet away, and in
the dark? I think not, but the reader accepts this additional detail from
the author and gains their first impression of a lonely but romantic and
passionate man, trembling in the dark.

k 2

49

 

 

Mixed narrative
A writer can enjoy the beneﬁts of both kinds of narrative approach by adopting an
essentially third-person structure and then having lengthy passages or even whole
chapters within it where a character or characters tell part of their story in the
ﬁrst person. A striking example of this method is Bleak House by Charles Dickens,
where there is one omniscient voice who has much knowledge and a strong social
conscience, and another, Esther Summerson, who tells her own story and makes
observations on those around her, but is limited by her point of view and situation.
The narrator can also adopt the limited point of view of one character in the 5
 story without having to use a ﬁrst—person narrative style. A good example of this is 
ocalization ismerumitéa paint 7' in Disgrace by I. M. Coetzee, a novel written in the third person throughout (‘he’) ‘5
fview of onech‘a‘racterinthe _. but focalized upon the thoughts and feelings of the main character, David Lurie.

low 7 V “ H 7' ~r \ I 1 It is also written in the present tense, making its experiences very immediate and
' i ' vivid (see page 195 for a passage from Disgrace for analysis).

 

  

 

 

simwplveexa mjple. 7

¥__—‘_ _ {ICambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Ome— Wmareyougo/ngiasredOrwethWW r :  ' yr

Free indirect speech as used '/ thought/mightgo and visit Thandekq,’rep/ied Tshepo. (Direct speech)? 

in literary works is a mixed form O/wethu asked Tshepo angrily where she was going.” r ' I
Where it is difficult to separate She rep/ied thatshe was going to visit Thandeka. , : (indirect or reported speech _ 
the voice ofthe narratorfrom ~ *
the voice ofthe character. Some

parts Wm Sound like mdlreCt Jane Austen and James Joyce are well—known exponents of this kind of narrative.

or reportEd SpeeCh bUt Others What it allows is a kind of double perspective — the words seem to come from both

sound very close to the vorce of . , , , , _ .

the Character 1ns1de and outSIde the character 5 mind at once, and this can be very effective. Here
are two examples, one from Jane Austen’s Emma and one from a story in Dubliners

 

 

 

 

 

by James Joyce.
1
‘Let me entreat you,’ cried Mr Elton; ‘it would indeed of drawing. Don’t pretend to be in raptures about
be a delight; Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, mine. Keep your raptures for Harriet’s face. ‘Well, if
to exercise so charming a talent in favour of your you give me such kind encouragement, Mr Elton, I
friend. I know what your drawings are. How could believe I shall try what I can do. Harriet’s features
you suppose me ignorant? Is not this room rich in are very delicate, which makes a likeness difﬁcult;
specimens of your landscapes and flowers! and has and yet, there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye,
not Mrs Weston some inimitable ﬁgurepieces in her and the lines about the mouth which one ought to
drawing—room, at Randalls?’ catch.’
Yes, good maul—thought Emma—but what has all Jane Austen Emma (1816) I .
a that to do with taking likenesses? You know nothing 
The free indirect speech in Extract 1, which I’ve marked withunderlining, is
between two passages of direct speech and is very effective for showing the
difference between what a person says out loud and what they are actually thinking.
2
A few light taps upon the pane made him turn to the treeless hills, falling softly upon the Bog of Allen and,
window. It had begun to snow again. He watched farther westward, softly falling into the dark mutinous
sleepily the ﬂakes, silver and dark, falling obliquely Shannon waves. It was falling, too, upon every part of
against the lamplight. The time had come for him to the lonely churchyard on the hill where Michael Furey

set out on his journey westward. Yes, the newspapers lay buried.
were right: snow was general all over Ireland. It was

falling on every part of the dark central plain, on the James Joyce DUblmers (1914)

 

TIP

Whether a writer uses a first—person, third-person or mixed narrative approach,
there will always be artistry in its handling so that particular effects can be
achieved, as you will see in later examples. Writers make deliberate choices.

WWWWWWWWThe coming-of-age or growing-

up novel (sometimes called

the bi/dungsromon) has a young
erson as its main character. it

may be in either first— orthird—

person form.

in metafiction, narrators
Comment on their own writing

in a selﬂreilexive manner, or

play games with the readers,
reminding them that writing a
novel is a process, and the end
result is not real life. The finished
article is a construct ofthe writer.
Some examples ofthis are to be
found in the work ofJohn Fowles
(The French tier/tenants Woman)
Salman Rushdie (Midnight’s
Children) and tan McEwan
(Atonement). Two novels by
Chimamanda Adichie, Ho/fofa
Yellow Sun and Americanah, have
major characters whose writings
become part ofthe novel and
contribute to its social analysis
and characterisation.

Now that you have thought about who tells the story (the narrator) it is time to
consider some of the typical themes of the novel. The "‘ “i ‘ 3 experience,
the inﬂuence of family, gender issues, love and marriage, money, class and culture,

 

journeys, town and country, the individual and society, education, crime — these

all feature prominently in the history of the novel. A concern of the novel which
has emerged consistently in the latter half of the twentieth century and up to the
present is writing itself. This is known as metaﬁctéan. It is not a new idea, however,
since Laurence Sterne’s novel Tristram Shandy (1760—67) tells a story, but interrupts
and reﬂects on it.

 

The novelist or short story writer chooses to set their novel or short story in a
particular society at a speciﬁc time, Which may not be contemporaneous with the
novelist’s own life. It may be set in a country different from the one in which you
live. It may be in the far or not so distant past, or even, in the case of a science
ﬁction work, set in the future.

As part of your preparation, make notes on the novel or short stories you are
studying, focusing particularly on:

Where and when the novel or stories are set

What kind of society is depicted?

Is there more than one setting/society? If so, are they used as contrast with one
another, so that one emphasises distinctive features of the other?

What effect does this have on the narrative/creation of characters?

Is the setting a background for the action, or does it assume greater importance
in the structure of the novel as a whole?

 

The moors above Haworth, in the north of England, familiarto Emily Bronté.Colonial and post-colonial
literature is written in English
from a number ofsocieties which
were governed in the past by
Britain as a colonial power. Post—
colonial works explore the issues
of personal andnational identity
and displacement, often using

particularnarrative‘techniques _

to do so.

A back story is a set of events
leadingup to the main plot —
background information that
can be'revealed during the, main
narrative. ‘ ’ ’

Stream of COﬂSCibuShESS’lSﬂ
writing Which tries toiexpfress the
_ very complicated thoughts and ,
feelings which pass through the
mind at any one time. Virginia 7
Woolfand James Joyce are ’_ ‘
famous examples of writers in
this form.

Some examples of setting

Some novels have as a title the name of a place, a house even, or diﬂferent
geographical areas, for example, Wuthering Heights (Emily Bronte), Bleak House
(Charles Dickens), The Mill on the Floss (George Eliot), Northanger Abbey (Jane
Austen), Barchester Towers (Anthony Trollope) or Brideshead Revisited (Evelyn
Waugh). A house is usually the centre for a family with its culture and attitudes as
well as an economic unit, so money is almost always a concern — indeed it is one of
the most important themes in the English novel, together with class. Northanger
Abbey is in part a parody of Gothic novels which are often set in old medieval
buildings, ruined abbeys and the like. In North and South by Elizabeth Gaskell, the
distinctive geographical settings and cultural oppositions give the novel its title
and central concern. Americanuh is a contemporary novel with a range of settings:
Nigeria, North America and England, and the word is one coined by characters
talking about attitudes to the United States. The Indian, New Zealand and Western
Australian settings of Games at Twilight, The People Before and On Her Knees, to i
give just three examples from Stories of Ourselves, are essential for an appreciation L
of the stories’ themes and characterisations.

Insights into colonial and post~colonial societies depend upon their particular
settings, as do the stories from North America in Stories of Ourselves, for example
The Moving Finger by Edith Wharton and The Contest by Annie Proulx. A Fistful of
Colours by Suchen Christine Lim is a novel set in Singapore with back stories from
old colonial times as well as debates on current issues in the modern city state.

ACTIVITY 7.5

See if you can ﬁnd some other novels whose titles are the name of a house or
a place or a geographical setting. If you have read one of them, consider why
the novelist has chosen to focus upon the setting rather than a character or a
theme.

would this be different if the setting was elsewhere? You may ﬁnd that certain
themes are universal — such as relationships between family members, or

the individual’s struggles within particular social groups, or the desire of
one person to have power over another, or loss or love or regret, and so on.
However, setting the ﬁctional exploration of these themes in a particular
world will add depth or poignancy to its eifects.

Concrete creation or stream of consciousness?

Some novels are concrete and realistic in their descriptions of places, attempting
to replicate in words the sense impressions of the physical world they focus on.
Other works try to create the complex impression of a character’s response to that
world by giving an impression of the ebb and ﬂow of their consciousness. It is
possible to combine the two approaches; this has been particularly evident in more
contemporary works of ﬁction.- *Am'wyzawiwi we 

 

 

 

Unit 7: Studying a novel or short story

ACTIVITY 7.6

The two extracts below are both concerned with a character. Decide which
kind of writing each is: concrete and realistic or inwardly responsive. Try
rewriting each one in the style of the other. Discuss the different effects
created with a classmate.

    

   
 
  
 

  

Original Rewritten

   
  

It is rewritten as if focused on his interior
thoughts.

Extract 1 has concrete and sensory
descriptions ofthe experiences and

actions of the main character, presented
as external to himself.

   
 
   
   
  
  
  
   
 

  
  
  
  
  
  
 

   
   
  
  
  
 

As he entered the shed a pair of startled
swallows flew out. A harrow covered in dust
and cobwebs occupied most of the floor.
Barely able to see in the gloom, breathing
an odour of paraffin and wool and tar, he
scratched along the walls among picks and
spades, odds and ends of piping, loops of
wire, cartons of empty bottles, till he came
upon a pile of empty feed-sacks, which he
dragged into the open, shook clean, and
laid out as a bed for himself on the stoep
[veranda].

Why am I here? he thought. I can’t see,
i don’t know where I’m going and I’m
so tired, very tired. What’s that terrible
smell? If only I could find somewhere to lie
down and something to cover myself with,
I would lie and sleep, sleep and never get
up again.

 
   
     
   
   
 
  
  
 

 
  
   
  

J. M. Coetzee Life and Times ofMichael K
(1983)

Extract 2, also in the third person ‘he’, is
focused internally on the stream of the
character’s consciousness.

    

It is rewritten to emphasise what he is
doing and the things which surround him.

 
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
  

   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

   
  
  
 

How trifling it all is, how boring it all is, he
thought, compared with the other thing

— work. Here he sat drumming his fingers
on the table-cloth when he might have
been — he took a flashing bird’s eye view
ofhis work. What a waste oft/me it all was
to be sure! Yet, he thought, she is one of
my oldest friends. lam by way of being
devoted to her. Yet now, at this moment
her presence meant absolutely nothing to
him: her beauty meant nothing to him; her
sitting with her little boy at the window

— nothing, nothing. He wished only to be
alone and to take up that book.

He sat and drummed his fingers on the
red checked table—cloth. He glanced at his
wife and son sitting at the window that
looked out onto the sea. The old book

he was reading was on the table next to
his steaming cup of coffee, together with
the used crockery, scraps of food and the
coffee pot.

   
  
  
 
 
 
      
 
    
    

Virginia Woolf To the Lighthouse (1927)

ﬁséag metaeher ta express setting
Here is an example from The White Tiger by Aravind Adiga. The urban setting is

given horriﬁc metaphorical life in the comparison with the hens, the writer making
it explicit in the last sentence of the extract.

53Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Look at the way they keep chickens there in the
market. Hundreds of pale hens and brightly coloured
roosters, stuffed tightly into wire—mesh cages, packed
as tightly as worms in a belly, pecking each other

and shitting on each other, jostling just for breathing
space; the whole cage giving off a horrible stench — the
stench of terriﬁed, feathered ﬂesh. On the wooden
desk above this coop sits a grinning young butcher,
showing the ﬂesh and organs of a recently Chopped—up

It was a town of red brick, or of brick that would
have been red if the smoke and ashes had allowed it;
but, as matters stood it was a town of unnatural red

chicken, still oleaginous with a coating of dark blood.
The roosters in the coop smell the blood from above.
They see the organs of their brothers lying around
them. They know they’re next. Yet they do not rebel.
They do not try to get out of the coop.

The very same thing is done with human beings in
this country.

Aravind Adiga The White Tiger (2008)

In the next example, a particular setting is used which is neither concrete nor
internalised, but expressed with such Vivid metaphorical language that the reader

is in no doubt of the writer’s strength of feeling. It is not directly connected with a
character.

town of machinery and tall chimneys, out of which
interminable serpents of smoke trailed themselves for
ever and ever, and never got uncoiled.

and black like the painted face of a savage. It was 3

Charles Dickens Hard Times (1854)

ACTIVITY 7.7

Look closely at the novel or short stories you are studying to identify its/
their main concern/s, narrative method/s, approach to setting and distinctive
presentation of experience. The next unit will give you further practice in
identifying these aspects, using the openings of novels or stories to do so.

      
  
  
  
  
 
 

   

TIP

Read your set text thoroughly several times. Once is never enough. Best to turn off

your phone and other electronic devices and immerse yourself in the world of the
noveH

Some tips for better revision:

- Don’t always start at the beginning every time you pick up the book to revise.

Students often know the early parts of a novel or play more thoroughly because
ofthis.

- Choose a chapter at random and see how well you know it.

- Can you say what happenedjust before and what happensjust after your
chapter?

- Choose a few paragraphs for close analysis. They will often reveal a great deal
about the writer’s themes and style.

“WWW