Unit 28: Tackling a passage question

 

Unit 28: Tackling a passage question

 

Revise the Part 1 units on
poetry, prose and drama where
detailed advice is given.

A passage question in an exam includes a printed poem, part of a novel or short
story, or a section of a drama and asks you to write on it. There are two common
types of passage question.

For the ﬁrst type, you have to focus on the given text and write a commentary
on an aspect of it (such as creation of atmosphere, main concerns, characterisation,
use of a particular kind of language, and so on).

For the second type (usually at a more advanced level), you must write a critical
appreciation of it and then relate it to the rest of the work — more poems by the poet
or stories by the short-story writer, other parts of the novel or play.

With the second type, you have the advantage that you are familiar with the work in
question, so your commentary is not an Unseen. However, for both types of question,
all the close analysis work you do on Unseens will be helpful to you. For the second type
of passage question, you have the challenge of writing a good, well—structured essay
which both focuses on the appreciation and incorporates wider reference.

How to choose: You are faced with a choice between a) a critical essay, and b)

a passage question. Which will you opt for — a) or b)? You may feel secure because

you have the poem or piece of prose or drama printed in front of you, so you don’t

need to worry about remembering quotations. On the other hand, you will have to

have plenty of detailed points to make about the printed extract, as well as referring

to the whole work, if the question asks for wider reference. The critical essay would 253
allow you to range more widely, using references chosen by you from what you

know best. Only you can decide, but give it a moment or two of careful thought.

However, do not choose a poem that you don’t know very well and treat it like an

Unseen! Don’t be tempted to use a prepared answer, either.

Approach to analysis

Type 1: Passage questions (not requiring wider reference)
You are familiar with the work because you have studied the set text.

Poetry

You are asked a particular question, so your analysis must be focused on that.
Make sure you look at the structure and verse form, the rhythm, rhyme, pace, the
language: ﬁgures of speech, images of the senses, the diction (the kinds of words
used), sound effects such as alliteration and assonance. It may be relevant to talk
about the atmosphere, and certainly the tone: the speaking voice of the poem. The
question may speciﬁcally ask you to look at this. All your analysis must be focused
on the particular question asked, so don’t be mechanical in your application of
checklists. Structure the essay clearly, With a topic sentence for each paragraph.

PFOSG

You are asked a particular question, so your analysis must be focused on that.

A common requirement is to consider particular characters — you will need to look
closely at the language used to present them. You will be able to identify the main
concerns (or themes) of the set passage if you are asked for one of these. You know the
themes of the novel as a whole, but not all of them will be evident in the passage. Read
carefully and don’t make assumptions — always relate your answer to the question asked.Cambridge International AS and A Level Literature in English

 

Identify relevant imagery and ﬁgures of speech, discussing their effect. Consider
any noteworthy diction.

The writer’s tone is an important feature of any piece of writing, whether in
prose or poetic form. Finally, the atmosphere created in the prose passage is just
as worthy of discussion as it may be in a poem though, again, make sure this is
relevant to the question asked.

When analysing a prose passage, you will need to look at its division into
paragraphs and sentences. Do they vary between shorter and longer? Look at any
longer passages of description and reﬂection. Is there a climax in the passage? Look
at the dialogue if there is any. What effect does it have?

Drama
You are asked a particular question, so your analysis must be focused on that. 

1 Plot and context How is the story, or plot, developed in the passage you are
given? Remember that although you will never be expected to tell the story in an
advanced essay, it is an essential foundation for all your understanding of, and
response to, the play. Note the context of the passage in the play as a whole, and
consider how it ﬁts into the wider structure.

2 Themes What major concerns of the work as a whole are developed in the
passage? How are the play’s issues expressed and further explored?

3 Characterisation Are any new characters introduced? If so, how do they ﬁt into
the picture so far established?

4 Dramatic action What is going on in the sequence in front of you? The action is
one of the most difﬁcult aspects to consider when you are writing an essay; you
a Will need to use your imagination to understand this aspect well. Make use of the
stage directions — they will help you.

Type 2: Passage questions (requiring wider reference)

Look at the points made above, as they continue to apply at a more advanced level;
then consider how to structure your essay. Below are two methods of approaching
the advanced type of passage question (requiring wider reference).

Metth 1

1 General introduction.

2 A critical appreciation, following guidelines for poetry, prose or drama. This may
take three or four paragraphs.

3 Then a wide—ranging paragraph which links to the points made under point 2 and
relates to other poems or the rest of the relevant parts of the novel or play.

 

TIP

4 Conclusion: highlighting the relationships between the printed passage and the

There Isn tone right way to general comment

g do this. Try both methods and
i see how you get on — choose Methad 2
what works best for you.

Check the balance ofyour 1 General introduction.

essay by underlining all the 2 A critical appreciation, following guidelines for poetry, prose or drama. This
comments in your essay may take three or four paragraphs. At the end of each paragraph relate the
WhICh relate to the rest of the points you have made to other works by the poet, or the sections of the novel or

teXt rather than the passage play, depending on the question asked. You may be able to make these linking

There ShQUld always be more comments within each paragraph. There are detailed examples in Part2 of this
on the printed passage. You b 0k
0 .

i will find examples of this in
Unit 25. 3 Conclusion: highlighting the relationships between the printed passage and the
general comment.