Unit 14: Studying play structures

  

ﬁnit 14: Studying play structures

Linear structure

How a play is constructed will have a signiﬁcant effect on the audience’s response to

its main concerns. All plays will have action and may enact a kind of linear process,
as shown in the following diagram:

   
     
  

    
  

55v TERMS g I _
I Is the early part of g, , 
hich the audience  I The beginning or exposmon
kgmund informatth giVes the background and Prepares the Potential for conﬂict, or shows the

events’ Character? pressures which come from certain characters’ motivations.
themes, so that ,_ V _

_ and what’s going?  l

  

  
     
    

   
  

   

' nt comes from 3 Then the central section can reveal complications developing, a counter-force

rd which means 7 , f operating and conﬂict coming out into the open.
nd is used in relation:  1

ing or resolving thef; "

es ofthe plot. "

 
   
   
    

   
      
 

Finally an ending is reached, often after many climaxes in the action. This is often
called the denouement.

      

There may be a different state of affairs by the end: the world of the play may have

altered, the balance of power is different, or perhaps someone has changed. There 93
may be a resolution, a denouement or unravelling. In some plays, deaths end

the action; in others, marriage or other kinds of union. This linear structure of

exposition, development, complication and denouement is very dynamic and uses
climaxes effectively.

  
       
    
 

In some contemporary plays the situation may seem to have gone nowhere
and returned to where it began, but in fact there is always more process than
ﬁrst appears. In Beckett’s Waiting for Godot, Godot has not arrived, true, but the
audience is now fully acquainted with the two tramps and has experienced their

personalities and obsessions, as well as gaining insight into the playwright’s View of
existence.

 
      
     
  

Shakespeare’s plays are divided into ﬁve acts, each of which has a number of
scenes. Some of these are brief — a mere ten or twenty lines — and some lengthy,
with several hundred, and these scenes can themselves be divided into shorter

units, although nominally one scene. More contemporary drama may have only
two or three acts.

Plot

All plays have a plot or story, though some are simpler than others. The story of a
Shakespeare play is always complex, with many characters and a number of stories
going on at the same time and interweaving one with the other. The main plot of
a Shakespeare play never follows through scene after scene without a break, but is
constantly interspersed with the sub-, secondary or parallel plots. The effect is of

a rich weave of different threads, all moving onward, interacting and intersecting
unstoppably.

 
    
     
    
     
    

  
   

 REMINDER

 The MM is the events that
make up a story. The
‘ secondary stories are known
3: SU‘b-plots, or, if they are

ry mIportant, parallel plots.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Originality

Shakespeare’s plots are not original, in the sense that they use known stories by
other writers, often combined. However, these stories always have a different
emphasis and meaning when Shakespeare modiﬁes or adds to them. Originality

of plot was not particularly prized in his day and his audiences would have
appreciated a new slant on an old story.

\/

TIP

The complexity of the plot of some plays means that sometimes students

believe they are doing something worthwhile when they tell the story of a play.
Unfortunately at this level, telling the story doesn’t get you any marks — you are
expected to know it as the baseline from which you develop your critical insights
into other features of the work. Get to know the story really well but never tell it in

 

Exposmon

see deﬁnition Of eXPOSiﬁO" in All plays, of whatever era, have an exposition from which the audience will gain
the Key Terms box on page 93' essential information about the world of the play. ihe playwright always has the
challenge of making the exposition interesting because it could be boring if the ﬁrst

ﬂ characters on the stage just repeated the details of the story up to that point in a

long—winded 0r list-like way. Types of exposition include:

I Shakespearean exposition (see next section)

I beginning near the end of the story (signiﬁcant back—story — see page 96)

I introduction of a major character

memory (sometimes indicated by a narrator speaking directly to the audience)
ﬁghting talk or action

thematic prologue

foreshadowing (see page 97)Unit 14: Studying play structures

Shakespearean exposition
Here are three of Shakespeare’s expositions as examples:

qheseus and Hippolyta are about to be married. They
V discuss their courtship and Theseus’s impatience
'V r the marriage. He tells his servant to go out and

ncourage sport and merriment among the youth of

thens as part of the wedding celebrations_

A Midsummer Night’s Dream

2
Three witches meet in a storm and agree that they will

meet Macbeth. When the scene changes, the king is
being given a report of a bloody battle which has been
going on, in which his follower, the noble Macbeth,

treacherously, so the king announces that he is to be
put to death and Macbeth is to receive his title.

Macbeth

3

The Duke of Gloucester speaks directly to the
audience. The battle is over and thoughts turn from
warlike behaviour to the pleasures of love, but not
for him, as he is deformed and not shap’d for sportive
tricks. He speaks of his intention to be a Villain rather
than a lover, therefore, and to set Clarence and the
king against each other.

Richard III

has fought bravely. The Thane of Cawdor has behaved

ACTIVITY 14.1

Read the sample responses below and consider the expositions of the plays
you are studying.

 

Each of these events has far-reaching consequences in its respective play.

In 1, the activities of the Athenian youths and the attempts oithe group of
rude mechanicals to celebrate the wedding will set in motion the comedy and
complication of the plots ofthe play. The language used by Theseus reminds
us ofthe passion of love but also its cruelties, which will be explored during
the plots ofthe play before a happy ending is reached.

in 2, the witches know Macbeth and are seeking him outjust as he is
promoted for his bravery; his latent ambition will be encouraged by his
promotion and by the witches’ promises of grandeur. We expect no good to
come of this meeting.

in 3, the expressions of physical self—disgust at his deformity and
determination to prove a villain prepare the audience for the machinations
of Gloucester, who will later in the play become King Richard III. He says he is
subtle, false and treacherous and we see these qualities enacted immediately
after this first section of the scene. His vitality and liveliness promise a very
compelling character.

SAMPLE RESPONSECambridge 1nternational AS Level Literature in English

 

More examples of exposition
ﬁeginnieg the pie}: near the and at the stary

I In Sophocles’s great tragedy Oedipus Rex, the king has already murdered his
father and married his mother long before the action of the play starts. When
he demands the truth out of the old shepherd, we, and Oedipus, discover the
essential facts and the crisis breaks.

I In The Crucible (Arthur Miller), John Proctor’s affair with Abigail is over and
she has been dismissed from the household before the action begins, but the
consequences of that relationship are still to unravel as the play progresses.

I In The Tempest (Shakespeare), Prospero was ousted many years before the acth
of the play and he is only now able to take revenge, or at least get his own back.

I Fugard gradually lets the audience know how past events have led up to the
point at which The Road to Mecca begins.

tetreeiuetiea a“? a maier charaeter
He or she often has unresolved problems or an aim which is, as yet, unrealised.

I Macbeth shows his prowess on the battleﬁeld, but his ambitions are
unreconciled as yet, in spite of the honours which the king bestows upon him.

I The Common Man in A Man for All Seasons (Bolt) plays many roles, all
secondary to the scenes of the main characters but vital in his commentaries
and contribution to the ﬂuency of the action.

I Jane Hopcroft is introduced cleaning the kitchen in Ayckbourn’s Absurd
Person Singular before a word of dialogue is spoken. Her Obsessive housework

m is a source of much of the play’s comedy as well as a satirical comment by the
playwright on conventional attitudes to social class.

Memes“? gaiaya

I At the beginning of Tennessee Williams’s The Glass Menagerie, the main
character Tom tells the audience it is a memory play and guides their responses
and sympathies into the ﬁrst scene.

I Similarly, the boy — Michael — in Dancing at Lughnasa (Brian Friel), now a
grown man narrating the story of his sisters, speaks directly to the audience and
reﬂects on the nature of memory.

I Less simply, Death of a Salesman (Miller) interweaves memories of the past into
the present timescale of the play, complicating the effect with fantasy sequences.
The play was originally entitled The Inside of His Head, reminding us that
what goes on in our minds is a complex mixture of the past, the here—and-now
and our imaginative ﬂights of fancy. (Look back at the passage from Virginia
Woolf’s novel To the Lighthouse on pages 74—5 in Unit 11 to see how a novelist
deals with a similar concern.)

Fighting taik
To begin with dissension is exciting for an audience as well as helpful in
establishing the play’s concerns.

I The exposition of The Alchemist by Ben Jonson is a ﬁerce quarrel between the
three collaborators.

I The opening of Romeo and Iuliet is a quarrel between the household servants
of Montague and Capulet, from which the situation of the two households, both
alike in dignity is revealed to the audience.ore on page 234 about
adowing in King Lear.

   
 

  
 

 

  
  
  
     
  

 

ACTIVITY 14.2

  

ow do the openings of

‘ ‘e plays you are studying
repare the audience for the
étion?

 

  

7_ ing see definition

 

    

g up the whole  I

Unit 14: Studying play structures

I The debate in Fugard’s My Children! My Africal, on the other hand, is a formal
presentation in words of arguments about gender differences.

Thematic prologue

I Top Girls (Churchill) has as its ﬁrst act a surrealistic scene set in a restaurant
which is completely timeless since all the female characters in it come from
down the centuries to celebrate the promotion in the ofﬁce of the 20th century
woman Marlene. The scene is set with a feminist agenda, the dominant theme
that will aﬁect the rest of the play.

I Death and the King’s Horseman (Soyinka) establishes the importance of key
rituals and central symbolic ﬁgures in the tribe before the main action begins.

Foreshadowing

A playwright will sometimes give a hint of what is to come in the play. This is
known as foreshadowing.

I Situations may seem particular knotty — can they ever be resolved?

I Characters may appear to have personalities which are volatile or inﬂexible.

I The language and imagery has an undertone of uncertainty or even menace.
Sometimes it is stated directly. The chorus in Romeo and Juliet says: a pair of star—
crossed lovers take their life, so we know from the outset that a tragedy will occur.

Action

The central action of a play is often forged by a chain of cause and effect, which the
audience can believe and be involved in.

I Sometimes one of the characters is a driving force who makes things happen, for
example Shakespeare’s Richard III or Norman in Alan Ayckbourn’s The Norman
Conquests.

I Perhaps the hero has to face obstacles before his goals can be reached, and these
struggles may be mental, something within his own nature, rather than physical
or contextual. Shakespeare’s tragic heroes are often in this category.

I In Top Girls, this pattern is ironically reversed for Marlene, who is shown as
successful from the outset. The play gradually reveals her inner life and secrets,
which show her to be less successful as a human being.

I In Harold Pinter’s play Betrayal, the action runs backwards so that the ﬁnal
scene is the ﬁrst in chronological time, making the adulterous relationship
which is its subject both more poignant and more pointless. The climax of the
play is the ﬁrst meeting of the lovers, not the last.

The action can also generate tension, which the playwright sustains by withholding
information from the audience or keeping them in suspense. The tension can rise
and fall through the central section of the play, but its general trend is upwards.

In comedy or farce, the suspense of the audience will be generated and satisﬁed in
gradual revelations until the ﬁnal unravelling reveals all.

ACTIVITY 14.3

Look at how Amy Herzog and Arthur Miller explore sensitivities and build
up tension in the following sequences from After the Revolution and A View
from the Bridge. Then read the commentaries which follow.

 
 

97Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

1 Emma and Miguel are going out together and Emma has just met Miguel’s
parents for the ﬁrst time, in a restaurant. Emma is spearheading a social
campaign, which involves a great deal of fundraising; this has involved her
making a speech at a graduation event where Miguel has just graduated. He has
taken a job helping her with the campaign. What impression is created of the
stresses within their relationship in this sequence? (Note: when the / mark is used
it shows that the next person starts to speak over the ﬁrst person’s words.)

EMMA: Sorry. I’ve just been ﬁghting off the EMMA: Why weren’t you talking?
feeling all day that lunch with your MIGUEL: I-I don’t know, I just felt  kinda
parents was like an unmitigated down — my parents were — I think
disaster and you haven’t said anything they thought it was gonna be some
about it yet, so  kinda corny culmination of immigrant
MIGUEL: What? No, no  dreams, you know, Oldest Son
EMMA: Tell me the truth. Graduates from Top Law School, and it
MIGUEL: The restaurant was loud, it was hard to was cold, and boring, and their cameras
hear each other. ran out of batteries, and  I told you
EMMA: And they basically never said a word, so they’re not totally thrilled about me 7
I was essentially yelling across the table taking this job. 
for an hour and a half about — I don’t EMMA: No you didn’t. 
even know what about. MIGUEL: I didn’t? Oh. Well — it’s not anything '
MIGUEL: I told you they’re shy at ﬁrst. you should worry about, but from their
EMMA: Yeah, but  perspective, it’s like, I took out all
MIGUEL: What? these loans and now I’m making thirty
EMMA: You could ’ve helped me out. I mean, thousand dollars a year working for my
you were like  silent  Sid over there. gringa girlfriend.
MIGUEL: Silent / Sid?

Amy Herzog After the Revolution (2010)

Emma is clearly looking for reassurance about the ﬁrst meeting with

her boyfriend’s parents and dominates the ﬁrst part of the dialogue, ;
trying to get a response from Miguel, even saying Tell me the truth.
Although she says she doesn’t know what she was yelling across the
table, we have a sense of her dominance in conversation. She is pushy

— ironically she interrupts Miguel when she says Why weren’t you
talking? giving us further insight into this tendency. The question here
is a turning point in the dialogue, since after it Miguel becomes more
dominant and answers at some length. It becomes clear from his speech
that he is of an immigrant family and his Latino descent is obvious.

His parents, he feels, were disappointed at the graduation event, and
perhaps some criticism of Emma’s part in it is implied, a part which she
has evidently continued in the restaurant, talking at the parents. Then
comes the key moment in the conversation — the fact that his parents
are not ‘thrilled’ that he has taken a job with her. He claims he has
mentioned it to her, but she curtly replies that he has not — indicating

a sensitivity over the fact that she will be his boss. His parents don’t

like the situation, and it is exacerbated by the fact that she is not of

COMMENT

\_hi W 7Unit 14: Studying play structures

 

j» ' . their background — she is a white girl, a gringo (a disparaging term in
Latin America for a white woman, usually American or British). He
blames his parents and uses what is ostensibly their word gringo, but
the implication is that he perhaps shares these misgivings, and this is
a subtle insult to her. Herzog successfully exposes some fault lines in
the relationship here. Using very naturalistic dialogue (kinda; gonna;
it’s like), she economically suggests a situation which may develop into
conﬂicts of temperament and background, of nationality and inter—
personal dominance. Unsurprisingly, the relationship does not last out
the play.

2 Eddie Carbone, with his wife Beatrice, is waiting for his niece Catherine to
come home after being out at the cinema with one of the illegal immigrants they
are giving a home to. Show how the dialogue develops the relationship between
Eddie and Beatrice and exposes the tensions between them.

‘ EDDIE: It’s after eight. BEATRICE: [Comes to him, now the subject is opened]
BEATRICE: Well, it’s a long Show at the Paramount. What’s the matter with you? He’s a nice
EDDIE: They must’ve seen every picture in kid, what do you want from him?
: Brooklyn by now. He’s supposed to EDDIE: That’s a nice kid? He gives me the
1 stay in the house when he ain’t working. heeby-jeebies. 99
i He ain’t supposed to go advertising BEATRICE: [smiling] Ah, go on, you’re just jealous.
himself. , EDDIE: Of him? Boy, you don’t think much of
BEATRICE: Well, that’s his trouble, What do you me.
‘ care? If they pick him up they pick him BEATRICE: I don’t understand you. What’s so
up, that’s all. Come in the house. terrible about him?
EDDIE: What happened to the stenography? I EDDIE: You mean it’s all right with you? That’s
don’t see her practise no more. gonna be her husband?
‘ BEATRICE: She’ll get back to it. She’s excited, BEATRICE: Why? He’s a nice fella, hard workin’,
l Eddie. he’s a good-lookin’ fella.
 EDDIE: She tell you anything? Arthur MillerA View from the Bridge (1955)
g.
E The pattern of the dialogue here is one of aggression (Eddie) followed
g by peacemaking justiﬁcations of Catherine’s behaviour (Beatrice). This
8 creates tension since the couple are in disagreement and there is an

 

f

underlying sense that there is more to the disagreement than at ﬁrst
appears. Eddie keeps changing the ground for his objections: ﬁrst, it is
just that they are late, so late they could have seen every ﬁlm that was
on; second, he takes issue with the fact that Rodolpho, the immigrant,
is out at all — he should be hiding at home, in Eddie’s opinion. Then it
is Catherine’s lack of study — she is not practising her shorthand skills
any more. Gradually the objections begin to focus in on the boy she

is spending time with — Eddie does not like him, he does not think heCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

m ACTIVITY 14.4

Discuss in class or with a ~
group the ending of the
plays you are studying. How
satisﬁed are you that the
ending resolves the issues
raised by the play?

mm

A symmetric structure does
notiollow oneevent after 7
another in a linearfashion, but
links aspects ofthe play through
networks of comparisons.

is good enough for his beloved niece, and by the time the end of this
extract is reached he is coming directly to the point: That’s gonna be her
husband? The position of Beatrice is interesting: she knows what Eddie
is getting at but tries to keep the peace at ﬁrst and make justiﬁcations
for Catherine’s behaviour, which she sees as natural. When she says
affectionately: She’s excited, Eddie, his immediate response is suspicion:
She tell you anything? And her response to her husband is also
affectionate. When she says: go on, you’re just jealous, Miller makes it
clear that she is smiling. But this disjunction between them is part of

a wider pattern of distrust and suspicion in the play, which will end
tragically. Here, suspense is created as the audience waits to see what
will happen when Catherine does ﬁnally come home from the movies.

 

Resolution (or denouement)

I In a comedy, the resolution often results in marriages and pairings, the
unravelling of the complications in a happy ending. Remember that denouement
or the French word dénouement (‘untying’) is often used for this stage. In A
Midsummer Night’s Dream, the marriages take place, the rude mechanicals
perform their play to great amusement, and the fairy king and queen resolve
their differences.

I In a tragedy, deaths will occur but there may be a sense ultimately of a new
beginning.

I In more contemporary drama, the ﬁnal scene may be much more open-ended
than those in earlier plays, with endings that suggest further complication or
even a return to the status quo of the very beginning of the play.

I The ‘tying up of loose ends’ can sometimes strike an audience or reader as
somewhat contrived. How believable is the undeclared passion of the Dominee
in The Road to Mecca (Fugard), for example? You may also be able to think of

novels in which the ending is over—neat, for the sake of the satisfactory rounding
off of the author’s concerns.

Symmetric structures

The dynamic linear structure discussed above is not the only way in which
playwrights handle their material. Although the action is driving onward, another
kind of network operates simultaneously in plays, shown in the following diagram:

  

1 Image patterns in the language which recur
and develop ideas through repetition
throughout the play

  
    
 
 
  

2 Parallels and contrasts of scene and
character

  
 
  

3 Symbols used to focus important themes
which recur throughout the play

 
 

These networks are known as symmetric structures.

iwmmmmn
awUnit 14: Studying play structures

Imagery is one of the most important symmetric structures used in Shakespeare’s

 

Look CﬁrefunY at the plays, and is also employed by other playwrights.
comparisonS suggeSted in You will remember from the poetry units that imagery is the word used for
the four €thaCtS and the metaphorical language. Shakespeare’s work is rich in imagery. Here are some
effects they haVe- examples of evocative metaphors and similes:

1 3

It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night  Here lay Duncan, 1

As a rich jewel in an Ethiop’s ear — His silver skin laced with his golden blood

Romeo and Juliet Act 1 Scene 5 Macbeth Act 2 Scene 3

2 4

Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider But earthlier happy is the rose distilled

Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,

Grows lives, and dies in sin le blessedness.
Richard [II Act 1 Scene 3 ’ ’ g

A Midsummer Night’s Dream Act 1 Scene 1

 

101

Extract 1

By comparing Duncan’s dead skin with silver, Macbeth gives an image of pallor
but also of something precious. His blood, normally red, is imaged as gold,
more precious than an ordinary mortal’s because he is the king, even though
dead. The word laced gives a visual image of the tracery of blood on his skin,
but ‘lace’ is also a word associated with the clothing of the nobility. So the
imagery given by Shakespeare to the guilty Macbeth is very visual in its effect,
but also reveals Macbeth’s awareness of the precious majesty of Duncan:

the murderer is in no doubt of the enormity of his crime, and this is revealed
through the imagery.

 

ee

Lu
U)
2
O
D.
U)
u
n:
Lu
_|
D.
E
<
m

 

ing

Extract 2

Egeus is threatening his daughter Hermia with being sent to a nunnery if

she doesn’t marry Demetrius, his chosen husband. He wants herto realise
that the single life of a nun in a Cloister will be a waste of her beauty, so he
attempts to persuade her by comparing her with a lovely rose which, if left
to bloom by itself, will simply wither and die. On the virgin thorn sounds
particularly harsh and bleak. Of course, she doesn’t want to be a nun, she
wants to be married — but to the man of her own choice, not her father’s!
What seems a conventional image (beautiful girl equals lovely rose) suits her
father’s conventional thinking, but it becomes more interesting as it develops
through the lines.

k JCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Repeated image patterns

The individual images on page 101 are very effective in themselves at stirring our
imaginations. However, Shakespeare also uses imagery in repeated patterns.

I The ﬁrst of the images here, from Romeo and Juliet, is part of a whole network of l 
images of light and darkness in the play which, taken together, point strikingly 
to the intensity of the lovers’ passion and the tragedy of their demise. 5

I Richard III is constantly compared to a spider with webs of deceit and
extraordinary venom in the play of that name.

I Macbeth is notable for image patterns of blood, from the ﬁrst bloody man in
Act 1 Scene 2, throughout its horrible murders to the ﬁnal decapitation of the
central character.

, mmﬂwyyu 

Other more recent playwrights use similar techniques. The car (referred to but not
seen) is an image used throughout Miller’s Death of a Salesman, suitably enough
for a travelling salesman. However, Willy is confused at times about which car he is
talking about, suggesting he is losing his grip on reality. It is also a reminder of the
family’s struggle to make ends meet in the present, but also of a happier past as well
as the means of his ﬁnal suicide.

ACTIVITY 14.6

Discuss whether the play you are studying has recurring patterns of images.
What are they? Try to use a library to ﬁnd books on Shakespeare’s imagery or
use search facilities on the Internet to identify literature websites that allow
you to ﬁnd instances of a repeated word representing an image in a play. (For
Shakespeare, you could try darkness or blood in Macbeth, madness in Twelfth
Night, corruption in Hamlet, or storm in King Lear.)

 

Parallels and contrasts

Parallel scenes are another eﬁective symmetric device used for emphasis. A
playwright may use a great variety of types of character and dramatic effect;
however, there may also be parallel scenes which, set against one another, have an
intensifying effect on the drama and point the contrasts that also exist. In every
case the play’s themes are emphasised too.

I Ayckbourn’s Absurd Person Singular has three acts and is structured around
the kitchens of three different households in a succession of Christmas parties
(set ‘Last Christmas  This Christmas  Next Christmas’). The couples who
live in the kitchens, and interact with each other and their visitors, are thus
placed by the playwright in parallel situations at parallel times. The audience’s
appreciation of the social satire is precisely focused by this device.

I In Romeo and Juliet, there are two scenes (Act 2 Scene 5 and Act 3 Scene 2)
when the Nurse brings news to Juliet: in the ﬁrst, she brings the happy news
of Romeo’s arrangement to meet and marry her; in the second, the terrible
news that Romeo has been responsible for the death of luliet’s cousin, Tybalt.
In each case, the structure of the sequence is the same: the Nurse doesn’t
come out with her news directly and Juliet is desperate for it. The effect is to
create comedy in one and tragic suspense in the other, but in both the Nurse’s
middle—aged slowness and commonsense approach to life contrast sharply with
Iuliet’s vivacious and impulsive youth. The contrast of youth and age is one of_ ..» ,-_ an rmmkbwrmnmwmw

   
    
  

 

>ur / REMINDER . . 
JuxtapOSltlon IS placing next E
to Oneanotherforeffect of E
)rko comparison or contrast. An ,
lgly effect which is Widely used! 53

. a, .umacamem

 
  
 
 
 

.casion in which the outcome
Very different from might have
en expected. it is alSo seen in .

l 1,
0t > enovel.

e is
he

tell

» “a , WNW vss‘mmmgmmmmF

TIP

When you are writing on an
extract from your set play,
consider its place in the
development of the play as

a whole: not only its place in
the unfolding ofthe plot and
the intensifying of the drama,
but also its relationship with
any parallel scenes.

.mammmmﬁ

 

imam

 

g , 
E.
.

 ACTIVITY 14.8
E

Look closely at the play

you are studying and

see whether any of the
symmetric structures
described above are used by
the playwright to enhance
theme or characterisation.

can“. 

  

v w  

‘t

 
   
   

TIP

Awareness of a play’s
structure and a willingness
to try to discuss it are

characteristic of higher—
qual'ty answers.



Wmﬂw‘xwwinmequ

Unit 14: Studying play structures

Shakespeare’s great themes, nowhere more obvious than in the juxtaposition of
these two parallel scenes.

I In Churchill’s Top Girls, scenes at the office and at Joyce’s house are strongly
contrasted: one is urban and affluent, the other rural and poor. The scenes have
very different tones and language, emphasising the lack of cohesion in women’s
roles in society and the diﬂiculty the sisters have in communicating with each
other.

Dramatic irony is a kind of irony of situation where one person or group of

people know something that others do not. It may be the audience who can see the
discrepancy between what a character thinks is true and what the situation actually
is. This may give rise to comic or tragic irony, or irony of situation.

ACTIVITY 14.7

Try to identify parallels and contrasts within your set play or any others that
you have read or seen. What effect does this juxtaposition of scenes have?

Symbols

The theatre is a Visual medium and playwrights often use physical symbols as
structural devices. They are symmetric rather than linear and may represent ideas
or develop characterisation, proving a constant physical reminder to the audience
of what they stand for throughout the play.

I In Candida by George Bernard Shaw, a photograph of Candida dominates the
early scenes. The characters’ discussion of her looks introduces the playwright’s
concerns about women, and how they are Viewed by men and other women.

I In Death of a Salesman (Miller), the wire recorder represents the world of new
technology and material objects accessible to those with money to spare. (Does
Howard need to hear his child’s voice recorded?) By contrast, Willy’s family is
struggling to pay rent and repair appliances.

I The Glass Menagerie (Williams) is itself symbolic of the fragile world inhabited
by Laura Wingﬁeld, but Williams also intended the play to have ‘legends’, or
key ideas and phrases, projected at the side of the stage to focus the audience’s
attention on the ideas of the play as they developed — a very Brechtian idea,
in practice (see page 84). However, this has rarely been incorporated into
productions of the play. The result of this has been to emphasise the naturalism
of the play and to diminish its symbolic and representative qualities.

I In Caryl Churchill’s Serious Money, the telephone represents the world of speedy
communications and insider dealing.

I In Othello, the handkerchief is the physical ‘proof’ that Othello thinks he needs
to show that Desdemona is unfaithful. In fact, the way he impresses the story of
the handkerchief upon her shows his domination of her.

I In King Lear, the letter which Edmund has forged to implicate his brother
represents sibling rivalry, the attempt of one brother to worm deeper into the
affections of his father than his brother, whom he is trying to oust.

I In The Road to Mecca, the lights and candles in the room are symbolic of the
luminous radiance and creativity of the central character, Miss Helen.

103