Unit 16: The language ofdrama

V unit 16: The language of drama

 

See page 24 for more on blank
~verse.

Plays are written in dialogue that is expressed in poetry or prose (or both), so the
analytical skills you have been developing will prove useful. This unit will look

at dramatic dialogue and give special emphasis to the language of Shakespeare.
Shakespeare was a poet and a man of the theatre, so his plays are both dramatic
and poetic in language and structure. However, even a modern playwright like
Caryl Churchill will on occasion use a poetic form, for example in Serious Money.
T. S. Eliot, probably better known for his poetry, wrote some verse dramas, the
most well known of which is Murder in the Cathedral.

Shakespeare the poet

Shakespeare’s plays are verse dramas with some sections written in prose. The use
of poetry does not mean the characters are poets — it means that the playwright is
using the power, descriptiveness and ﬂexibility of poetry to express the thoughts
and feelings of many of his characters; "lhe basic metrical scheme of each line

of the poetic speeches is blank verse. (Remember that blank verse or the iambic
pentameter has ten syllables arranged in ﬁve feet, or repeated units of unstressed
followed by stressed syllables.) Here are two examples of regular lines of iambic
pentameter:

I will not be afraid ofdeath and bane,
Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.

Macbeth in Macbeth Act 5 Scene 3

I looked upon her with a soldier’s eye,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand, 

Claudio in Much Ado About Nothing Act 1 Scene 1

Although iambic pentameter is the basic structure, it is not always easy to ﬁnd
perfectly regular examples of it because the conversational impact of the lines may
require some irregularities, however minor.

The verse is also dramatic and needs to be spoken out loud by actors to make
sense, not just to scan perfectly.

ACTIVITY 16.1

Find the stressed syllables in the following lines from Romeo and Juliet and
show how they contribute to the dramatic effect of the speech. Romeo is about
to commit suicide, thinking that Iuliet is dead.

0, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied ﬂesh. Eyes, look your last.

111Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

E The verse in Activity 16.1 is fairly regular iambic pentameter until the

g ﬁnal line, where Romeo’s determination to die, and powerful emotion,

8 are made more emphatic by the extra stresses, which make the line
irregular. I think world, wearied and ﬂesh should be emphasised, as well
as eyes, look and last.

mm In his earlier plays, Shakespeare uses rhyme quite extensively, but as his style
TIP matures, rhyme disappears apart from the occasional rhyming couplet, often to
LOO!‘ Closely'ai the V939 for end a scene emphatically, or to make a really memorable point. Here is an example
the irregularities, which give

. . where Hamlet has been told by his father’s ghost to avenge his murder:
emphaSIS to the emotional

or dramatic qualities of the The time is out ofjoint. O cursed spite,
g speech you are analysmg.
E

x A, That ever I was born to set it right!
z"

“swammewmmﬂwwvﬁammmmxwww We

The word cursed has two syllables because the —ed is pronounced; if it were one
syllable it would be spelt cars’d or even cars’t.
Here is a 20th century example from Wole Soyinka’s play Death and the King’s
Horseman. The Praise-singer and the women are chorus ﬁgures who speak in
unrhymed verse though the play is largely in the prose of ordinary conversation: ‘

PRAISE- The gourd you bear is not for shirking. 1 WOMEN: We shall all meet at the great market 5
SINGER: The gourd is not for setting down We shall all meet at the great market

At the ﬁrst crossroad or wayside grove. He who goes early takes the best bargains
Only one river may know its contents But we shall meet and resume our banter.

 

Wole Soyinka Death and the King’s Horseman (1975)

There is a great deal of repetition of phrases and lines, some lines (for example,
2, 4 and 7) have the tone of traditional sayings and the whole effect is of a chant
or ritual, which contrasts strongly with the conversations of the European
administrators — one of the key effects of the play. (You will ﬁnd an exercise on the
dialogue of this play on page 243.)

Contemporary playwrights use poetic techniques too. Look at these two
examples of rhyming couplets used by Caryl Churchill in Serious Money:

., WW1“ Wq-mnWVvK‘WMMU-mw ,..

a imam . e r-  "

JACINTA: I tell you I’ve caught a
Big cocoa importer,
Your deal goes without a hitch.
His school was at Eton
Where children are beaten,

ZAC: The last couple of years in the United States ;
it’s been takeover mania
And I guess the deals there have gotten
somewhat zanier.

Junk bonds are a quick way of raising cash, but
He’s a prince and exceedingly rich. it’s kind of a hit ’n’

run method, which doesn’t go down too well
in Britain.

Caryl ChurchillSer/ous Money (1987) l:11

lple

(no

   
 
 
 
 
     

 

Many exam candidates claim

wrongly that prose is only
used by Shakespeare for
the lOWer classes: servants
and peasants. This is not so.
Beware of making this false

claim yourself.

Wmdwi 5.1m” .v  -~-

ACTIVITY 16.2

Try to ﬁnd examples from
several plays, especially
your set play, to indicate
the varied use of verse and
prose. Look particularly for
scenes where both are used
and suggest what special
effects are created thereby.

mythia issin‘glelihes A ‘ I,
e uttered by alternate; L

 

.istichomythia This device;

re half—lines ofiverseare .

 

  

  

Unit 16: The language of drama

Churchill’s use of rhyming couplets in this play can be very witty and amusing: it is
difﬁcult not to be amused by a speech which rhymes hit ’n’ with Britain, and Zrmier
with mania. The ﬁrst example has a comic effect because it has some of the rhythms
of a limerick. The clever rhyme scheme makes these money—obsessed characters
sound very shallow, and lends a fast pace to the action, which is highly appropriate
for this play.

Shakespeare’s prose

Shakespeare uses prose in his plays as well as verse, more often in comedies than
tragedies. However, be careful not to make simplistic assertions about this. Prose

is used for lower—class characters, true. But it is also used for the nobility, both

in tragedies and comedies. Sometimes the scene moves from prose into verse

even when the same characters are speaking. This is usually to indicate that the
emotional quality of the action is becoming more intimate or intense. However,
there are also examples of longer prose speeches which are forcefully emotional.
You do need to look closely at each instance, rather than rushing into a generalising
comment about the use of prose.

Dialogue

When characters speak to each other, the interplay of the contributions to the scene
is known as dialogue. Sometimes when the scene is in verse, such as in Shakespeare,
the characters speak alternate lines.

LUCIANA: What, are you mad, that you do reason so?
ANTIPHOLUS: Not mad, but mated, how I do not know.
LUCIANA: It is a fault that springeth from your eye. _
ANTIPHOLUS: For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.

Shakespeare The Comedy ofErrors Act 3 Scene 2

Characters sometimes even share the lines with each other, and this suggests a
particularly close interaction between them.

PROSPERO! What is’t thou canst demand?

ARIEL: My liberty.
PROSPEROZ Before the time be out? No more.

ARIEL: I prithee,

Remember I have done thee worthy service, 

Shakespeare The TempestAct 1 Scene 2

In this dialogue between Prospero and Ariel, the ﬁrst two speeches form one line
and the second two speeches form one line, showing their intimacy even though
they are disagreeing.

113Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

In Romeo and Juliet, Shakespeare reveals the immediate aﬂinity of the two
lovers by having them share a sonnet:

 

ROMEO: If I profane with my unworthiest hand ROMEO: Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
This holy shrine, the gentle ﬁne is this: JULIET: Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray’r_
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand ROMEO: 0, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands
To smooth that rough touch with a tender do!
kiss. They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to
JULIET: Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too despair.
much, JULIET: Saints do not move, though grant for
Which mannerly devotion shows in this; prayers’ sake.
For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands ROMEO: Then move not while my prayer’s effect 
do touch, I take. :
i

t l ' h l l ’ ' .
And palm 0 pa m ls O y pa mers klss Shakespeare Romeo and JulietAct 1 Scene 5

  

,,,B§Ill€!,,TY,1§-,,3,

   

Find some more examples of these dialogue variations in the play you are
studying and try to work out the relationships of the characters involved and

m the dramatic eiiect of the scene.

Realistic speech patterns

In contemporary drama, some playwrights have striven to create the effect of
real—life speech, with all its repetitions, interruptions and unﬁnished sentences.
Churchill uses a method in Top Girls to capture the way people interrupt each
other, using a slash (/) to show the point of interruption. Here is an example from

Act 1:

JOAN: The day after they made me cardinal I fell ill and lay two
weeks without speaking, full of terror and regret. / But
then I got up

MARLENE: Yes, success is very

JOAN: determined to go on. Iwas seized again / with a
desperate longing for the absolute.

ISABELLA: Yes, yes, to go on

Caryl Churchill Top Girls (1982)

Churchill also shows characters continuing to speak right through another’s speech
(typical of real life) or responding to an earlier speech than the one immediately
preceding.

This method is also used in Amy Herzog’s 4000 Miles. In the following dialogue,
incomplete sentences and questions add to the effect of natural conversation with
all its repetitions and omissions:Unit 16: The language of drama

 

. . Amy Herzog 4000 miles (2011)
IS not a complalnt, that you came here

vERA; You what, came over the GW? instead of your — I’ve lost track whether

LEO: The —? she’s your girlfriend or not, the chubby
1 vERA; The George Washington Bridge? one, isn’t she up at / whaddayacallit — ‘ 1
 LEO; I guess, yeah. LE0: She’s not chubby. ’
 vERA; Was it pretty? At night? VERA: She’s — well, she’s not thin. ‘
g LEO;  yeah, actually. Yeah. I’m not much of a LEO: She’s healthy, she’s / strong.

city guy, but. It was all right. VERA: I don’t see what that has to do with it.

9 VERA; I’m - I must say I’m surprised, and this
l 
as“

Soliloquy

Some plays have very few such long speeches; others, like Hamlet, have many. Often
the character is confronting some truth about himself or his life as in Richard III’s
soliloquy I am determined to prove a villain 

ACTIVITY 16.4

Read and consider the following examples of soliloquies. r

 

1 l
The ﬁrst is from Fugard’s My Children! My Africa!, a play with only three
characters but each has a soliloquy — here Thami, the teenage student who
becomes caught up in violence.

115

I’m sorry to say, but I can’t do it any more. I have tried very hard,
believe me, but it’s not as simple as it used to be to sit behind that
desk and listen to the teacher. That little world of the classroom
where they used to pat me on the head and say ‘Little Thami, you’ll
go far!’  that little room of wonderful promises where I used to
feel so safe has become a place that I don’t trust any more. Now I sit
at my desk like an animal that has smelt danger, heard something
moving in the bushes and knows it must be very, very careful.

 

Athol Fugard My Children! MyAfrica! (1989)

  
 
   

m wtwmtamm§ 2 ‘

g Macbeth speaks his soliloquy reﬂecting on the meaninglessness of life when V :

The Word soliloquy, like a he hears of his wife’s death: : 3

eword tragedy, is often l l

V mISSpelled by candidates Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow i 

n their exam essays. Try to Creeps in this petty pace from day to day . 
make Sure that you can spell _‘ To the last syllable of recorded time; 

wo . I
ar rds such as these, Wthh And all our yesterdays have lighted fools l
. e central to the study Of

lltEratUre. The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle, l
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player

That struts and frets his hour upon the stage

And then is heard no more. It is a tale

Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury

Signifying nothing.

 

Shakespeare Macbeth Act 5 Scene 5Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 16.5

Find a soliloquy in the
play you have studied
and consider what sort of
effect it has in the play at
that point. What kinds

Of characters are given
soliloquies by the
playwright?

JAQUES:

ORLANDO:
JAQUES:
ORLANDO:
JAQUEs:
ORLANDO:
JAQUES:
ORLANDO:
JAQUESZ
ORLANDO:
JAQUES:

Yes, just.

3

In Death of a Salesman, Linda, Willy’s wife, speaks out loud to the audience

at the end Of the play, ironically addressed to her dead husband. This is part of
the ﬁnal speech Of the play:

Forgive me, dear. I can’t cry. I don’t know what it is but I can’t

cry. I don’t understand it. Why did you ever dO that? Help me,
Willy, I can’t cry. It seems to me that you’re on another trip. I keep
expecting you. Willy, dear, I can’t cry. Why did you do it? I search
and search and I search, and I can’t understand it, Willy. I made
the last payment on the house today.

Wit combats

In comedies, in particular, there are many examples Of scenes in which characters
are shown having witty dialogues with each other.

LADY BRACKNELL:  Is this Miss Prism a female ofrepellent aspect,
remotely connected with education?

[somewhat indignantly] She is the most
cultivated Of ladies, and the very picture of
respectability.

It is obviously the same person. May I ask what
position she holds in your household?

[severely] I am a celibate, madam.

CANON CHASUBLE:

LADY BRACKNELLI

CANON CHASUBLE:

Oscar Wilde The Importance ofBeing Earnest (1985)

This wordplay, revealing Opposite values, is delightful for the audience, who are by
now familiar with the two speakers and Miss Prism. In Shakespeare’s comedies
characters try to score points by outdOing each other’s puns. "lhese are not so much
funny scenes as admirably clever, and an audience would have to be very quick tO
catch every nuance Of the witty interchange between the characters. Here is a short
sequence from As You Like It:

I thank you for your company, but, have good faith,

I had as lief been myself alone.

And so had I. But yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too for your society.
God buy you. Let’s meet as little as we can.

I do desire we may be better strangers.

I pray you mar no more trees with writing love—songs in their barks.

I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly.
‘Rosalind’ is your love’s name?

had as lief: would rather

buy you = be with you

mar: make marks on

I do not like her name.

There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.
What stature is she of?Unit 16: The language of drama

 

oRLANDO; Just as high as my heart.

You are full of pretty answers: have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths’ Wives, and conned
them out of rings?

oRLANDO; Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.
You have a nimble wit 

 

Shakespeare As You Like ltAct 3 Scene 3

In the play, Orlando, the lover, has carved Rosalind’s name on the trees in the
forest; Iaques, the cynic, is against love but enjoys talk and philosophising. Here,
at the beginning each professes to dislike each other’s company and says he is only
being polite because it is fashionable to do so. Iaques has already shown he is witty
in the play, but Orlando holds his own: his quick-witted retorts impress Iaques,

as he admits at the end rather grudgingly. Notice that both accuse the other of
getting their jokes from another source — carved on a ring or out of a cloth book.
Originality in wit, if not plots, was much prized.

Verbal wit also runs throughout Restoration comedies and comedies of
manners such as The Rivals but it is not only a feature of comedy. Hamlet is
savagely witty and his pun on the word ‘kind’ in a little more than kin and less than
kind sums up one of the great paradoxes of the play: that your kin — your family —
are not always kind — well-disposed — towards you, a point already noted.

 

  

x KEY TERMS

édy of man M
ed with'soc
,ntions and what'lies

    
 

Songs

Songs, set to music, are used by playwrights to enhance the atmosphere of a scene,
especially in comedies. Such verses are rhymed, and they often have a refrain or a
repeated line, as songs usually do.

117

I Caryl Churchill ends each of the two acts of Serious Money with rousing,
raucous, scurrilous songs that encapsulate the supremely conﬁdent and careless
atmosphere of those whose greed makes them masses of money in the City of
London.

I In Edward Bond’s political drama Restoration, songs are used to point the satire
of the plot and show its contemporary relevance. 1‘

I Lady Fidget’s song in Yhe Country Wi e (1675) by William Wycherley, though 
lively and witty, has a serious point to make about men’s treatment of women. 

In each case the words of the song point to a theme of the scene or play as a

whole. Sometimes they are jolly and cheerful, but not always. In Twelfth Night, for

example, the song sun by Feste the Clown in Orsino’s court dwells on the tragic
potential of unrequited love. Here is the ﬁrst verse:

Come away, come away, death;
And in sad cypress let me he laid;
Fly away, ﬂy away, breath,

I am slain by afair, cruel maid.

My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
Oprepare it!

My part ofdeath no one so true

Portrait ofWilliam Wycherley. Did Share itCambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

The imagery of this song is conventional in the way it describes the lover’s suffeﬁn
but it is not just an exaggerated love lyric. Its eloquence reminds us that even in a 
comedy love can be explored as an experience that causes terrible suffering, You
have already seen that it can be shown as a kind of madness too.

Characteristic idiom

Plays such as Herzog’s After the Revolution and 4000 Miles, with their naturalisn1 of
dialogue, express American idiom throughout. "

VERA: Well will somebody come taste my eggplant?
LEO: Your eggplant isperfect, take a load 01% join us.

The following example of idiom is from Fugitives by the Singaporean playwright

Alﬁan Sa’at:

Scene 7 Ruler/Ruled: ZAINAL: That stunt lah! It’s called a Kickﬂip. It’s .,
[Son and Zainal are atRaﬂles Place MRT after more difﬁcult than the Ollie. 
midnight. They are sitting at aparapet and Zainal’s so'N: Your friends are very good.  7
foot is idly playing on a skateboard] ZAINAL: This is our hangout every Saturday.  i ‘
SON: So you guys always hang around this You, When are you going to get your

late on Saturdays? own skateboard? Cannot just borrow
ZAINAL: Yah. [Looks up at one ofhis friends’ mine all the time you know.

doing a stunt] SON: It’s so new to me, this subculture.

Alamak! Lagi sikit lagi!l Did you see ZAINAL: Subculture your backside lah.

that? 1 Just a bit more (Malay)
SON: What?

Alfian Sa’at Fugitives (2001)

The places referred to are in Singapore and the MRT 0r Mass Rapid Transport is
their underground rail system. However, note that there is also the idiom of the
skateboarding community in the words Kickﬂip and Ollie.

   
   

it is much easierto understand and appreciate a play if you can see a production
of it. You would grasp that the situations and minor language difficulties, such as
those in the final example above, become unimportant.

wumwmam

y"

a;  vs .. -. 4 w; . / WWW ymwuwvmammmmu