E

 

 

Unit 8: Prose — opening paragraphs

Unit 8: Prose — opening paragraphs

This unit is going to look at some different openings of novels and short stories,
how they have been created by their authors, and what effects they produce. You
can often guess what sort of work is going to unfold from the ﬁrst few paragraphs
of the narrative. It is really important for the writer to get the opening right, so that
you, the reader, are intrigued from the beginning. You long to enter this world, with
its distinctive social or natural background, its ideas and characters.

Openings from novels and short stories

ACTIVITY 8.1

Look closely at each numbered opening paragraph below and write two
paragraphs about its setting and characters as well as what sort of novel or
short story it might turn out to be. The language, as well as the narrator’s
position, may be helpful clues to you. There are seven examples here, but each
one is quite different. Sample responses are given after the ﬁnal extract.

1

Mr Beverley Metcalfe tapped the barometer in the
back hall and noted with satisfaction that it had fallen
several points during the night. He was by nature

a sun-loving man, but he believed it was one of the
marks of a true countryman to be eternally in need of
rain. He had made a study and noted the points of true
countrymen. Had he been of literary habit and of an
earlier generation, his observations might have
formed a little book of aphorisms. The true
countryman wore a dark suit on Sundays unlike the
ﬂannelled tripper from the cities; he loved a bargain

g and would go to any expense to do his marketing

by private treaty instead of through the normal
Channels of retail trade; while ostensibly sceptical and
Conservative he was readily fascinated by mechanical
gadgets; he was genial but inhospitable, willing to
gOSSip for hours across a fence with any passing
Stranger, but reluctant to allow his closest friends into

hls house  These and a hundred other characteristics
Mr Metcalfe noted for emulation.

EVElyn Waugh An Englishman’s Home (1938) — short story

2

123/1}? .fafherjs family name being Pirrip, and my
rlstian name Philip, my infant tongue could make

of both names nothing longer or more explicit than
Pip. So, I called myself Pip, and came to be called
Pip. I give Pirrip as my father’s family name, on the
authority of his tombstone and my sister, — Mrs Joe
Gargery, who married the blacksmith. As I never saw
my father or my mother, and never saw any likeness
of either of them (for their days were long before the
days of photographs), my ﬁrst fancies regarding what
they were like, were unreasonably derived from their
tombstones. The shape of the letters on my father’s,
gave me an odd idea that he was a square, stout, dark
man, with curly black hair. From the character and
turn of the inscription, ‘Also Georgiana Wife of the
Above,’ I drew a childish conclusion that my mother
was freckled and sickly. To ﬁve little stone lozenges,
each about a foot and a half long, which were arranged
in a neat row beside their grave, and were sacred to
the memory of ﬁve little brothers of mine, — who
gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in
that universal struggle, — I am indebted for a belief
I religiously entertained that they had all been born
on their backs with their hands in their trousers—
pockets, and had never taken them out in this state of
existence.

Ours was the marsh country, down by the river,
within, as the river wound, twenty miles of the sea.

 

55My ﬁrst most vivid and broad impression of the
identity of things seems to me to have been gained
on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening. At
such a time I found out for certain, that this bleak
place overgrown with nettles was the churchyard;
and that Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and also
Georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried;
and that Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias,
and Roger, infant children of the aforesaid, were also
dead and buried; and that the dark ﬂat wilderness
beyond the churchyard, intersected with dykes and
mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it,
was the marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond
was the river; and that the distant savage lair from
which the wind was rushing, was the sea; and that
the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it all and
beginning to cry, was Pip.

Charles Dickens Great Expectations (1860—61) — novel

 

Pip in the graveyard.

3

Two elderly women sat knitting on that part of the
veranda which was screened from the sun by a golden
shower creeper; the tough stems were so thick with
ﬂower it was as if the glaring afternoon was dammed
against them in a surf of its own light made visible in
the dripping, orange-coloured clusters. Inside this

Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

coloured barrier was a darkened recess, rough mud
walls (the outer walls of the house itself) forming

two sides, the third consisting of a bench loaded

with painted petrol tins which held pink and white
geraniums. The sun splashed liberal gold through

the foliage, over the red cement ﬂoor, and over the
ladies. They had been here since lunchtime, and
would remain until sunset, talking, talking incessantly,
their tongues mercifully let off the leash. They were
Mrs Quest and Mrs Van Rensberg; and Martha Quest,
a girl of ﬁfteen, sat on the steps in full sunshine,
clumsily twisting herself to keep the glare from her
book with her own shadow.

Doris Lessing Martha Quest (1952) — novel

4
May in Ayemenem is a hot, brooding month. The days
are long and humid. The river shrinks and black crows
gorge on bright mangoes in still, dustgreen trees. Red
bananas ripen. Jackfruits burst. Dissolute bluebottles
hum vacuously in the fruity air. Then they stun
themselves against clear windowpanes and die, fatly
bafﬂed in the sun.

Arundhati Roy The God omea/l Thingsr(l997) — novel

5
The white hair was trapped in the tweezers. I pulled it
taut to see if it was gripped tightly, then plucked it.

‘Aaah!’ grimaced Daddy. ‘Careful. Only one at
a time.’ He continued to read the Times ofIrzdz‘a,
spreading it on the table.

‘It is only one,’ I said, holding out the tweezers,
but my annoyance did not register. Engrossed in the
classiﬁeds, he barely looked my way. The naked bulb
overhead glanced off the stainless steel tweezers,
making a splotch of light dart across the Murphy
Radio calendar. It danced over the cherubic features of
the Murphy Baby, in step with the tweezers’ progress
on Daddy’s scalp. He sighed, turned a page, and went
on scrutinising the columns.

Each Sunday the elimination of white hairs took
longer than the last time.

Rohinton Mistry Of White Hairs and Cricket from Tales from
Firozsha Baag (1987) — short story

6

Once upon a time and a very good time it was there
was a moocow coming down along the road and this
moocow that was coming down along the road met a
nicens little boy named baby tuckoowan:-

His father told him that story: his father looked at

him through a glass: he had a hairy face.
He was baby tuckoo. The moocow came down the

road where Betty Byrne lived: she sold lemon platt.

O, the wild rose blossoms
On the little green place.

He sang that song. That was his song.
0, the green wothe botheth.

When you wet the bed ﬁrst it is warm then it gets
cold. His mother put on the oilsheet. That had the

queer smell.
His mother had a nicer smell than his father. She
played on the piano the sailor’s hornpipe for him to

dance. He danced:

Tralala lala,
Tralala tralaladdy,
Tralala lala,
Tralala lala.

Uncle Charles and Dante clapped. They were older
than his father and mother but Uncle Charles was
older than Dante.

James Joyce A Portrait ofthe Artist as a Young Man
(1914—15) — novel

Unit 8: Prose — opening paragraphs

7

On a sticky August evening two weeks before her

due date, Ashima Ganguli stands in the kitchen of a
Central Square apartment, combining Rice Krispies
and Planter’s peanuts and chopped red onion in a bowl.
She adds salt, lemon juice, thin slices of green chili
pepper, wishing there were mustard oil to pour into
the mix. Ashima has been consuming this concoction
throughout her pregnancy, a humble approximation of
the snack sold for pennies on Calcutta sidewalks and
on railway platforms throughout India, spilling from
newspaper cones. Even now that there is barely space
inside her, it is the one thing she craves. Tasting from a
cupped palm, she frowns; as usual, there’s something
missing. She stares blankly at the pegboard behind

the countertop where her cooking utensils hang, all
slightly coated with grease. She wipes sweat from her
face with the free end of her sari. Her swollen feet ache

against speckled gray linoleum. Her pelvis aches from
the baby’s weight.

Jhumpa Lahiri The Namesake (2003) — novel

 

Lu
W
Z
O
D.
U)
Lu
I!
Lu
_l
D.
E
<
V)

 

 

1 It is clear from this opening paragraph that the writer is interested in the
way that his main character, Mr Metcalfe, is trying to be what he is not — a
true countryman. Metcalfe is trying to integrate himself into a social set
in the country to which he does not quite belong, though he would very
much like to. These and a hundred other characteristics Mr Metcalfe noted
for emulation. The writer’s list of examples is based on antithesis, for
example the contrast between the countryman’s suit and the flannel/ed
tripper; private treaty / retail trade; ostensibly sceptical / fascinated by
mechanical gadgets; Willing to gossip for hours across a fence / reluctant to
allow his closest friends into his house. These help to create a humorous,

satirical tone from the very first paragraph. The story revolves around
outsiders in the close-knit social set to which Mr Metcalfe aspires and
wittily exposes the social hierarchies in a Cotswold village.

2 The opening of Great Expectations establishes that it is a first-person
narrative with Pip as the protagonist. His description of the graves of his
family is both macabre and humorous, and this is a feature of Dickens’s
tone throughout the novel. Pip’s vivid imagination is also evident in the
next paragraph with its evocative depiction of the raw afternoon in the
bleak graveyard on the marshes and his sense of fear: an apt prelude to
the sudden appearance ofthe convict who terrifies him by his appearance,

 

57Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

the convict who is to have such an impact on his life. The final sentence
ofthis second paragraph is noteworthy as an example of Dickens’s style:
the parallel clauses with their incremental repetition gradually focusing
through time and space; the long, slow build—up to a climax (Pip, the
‘bundle of shivers’, the centre of the novel); and, typically of Dickens, the
bathos of the name Roger after the biblical and mythological—sounding
names ofthe other children adding a touch of humour. (This sentence is
one of my favourites in the whole of literature and reminds us that Dickens
is as poetic in his use of language as anyone working in lines and stanzas.)

3 This third—person narrative begins with a setting ofthe scene on a veranda
bright with colourful flowers. Before the characters are even introduced,
the rich beauty ofthe flowers and the contrasts between shadow and
brightness are emphasised. There are some indications of the setting, such
as the mud walls and the petrol tins with geraniums and the red cement if
floor, which do not sound like England today. (it is in fact set in Africa about
60 years ago.) The two ladies are very talkative: the word talking is repeated,
and the word incessantly sounds like a criticism from the narrator. Their
tongues have been let offthe leash: a metaphor which suggests that they
are like dogs kept under control most of the time but are now able to run
free. This might give the impression that they are normally supposed to
keep quiet (perhaps while their husbands do most of the talking — they are
both referred to with their husband’s names, not their first names). Martha
is introduced right at the end of the paragraph and her age immediately

suggests a character with whom a younger reader can sympathise. (Which of

n us has not sat as a child trying to amuse ourselves while our elders talk and

talk behind us?) The writer’s use of light and shade images is so extensive
that it perhaps suggests that metaphorically Martha’s story will be one of
striking contrasts. The sentences are long and richly descriptive.

4 This short opening paragraph is extremely descriptive with many
adjectives of colour and texture. The combination of this with short
sentences and present tense verbs (is, are, shrinks, gorge, hum) creates an
immediacy and dramatic impact for a scene in which, as yet, no people
have made an appearance. The reader expects an exotic setting (it is India)
and the author’s voice in the third-person narrative sounds authoritative.
However, although the images are exotic and colourful there are also many
words that suggest over—ripeness to the point of rotten ness (brooding,
humid, gorge, ripen, burst, fruity) and the flies stun themselves and die.

5 This first—person narrative begins in a most unusual way, with the
description of the main character plucking hairs from his father’s head. He
is evidently not very old as he calls his father ‘Daddy’, yet he is old enough
to be relied on to do thisjob every Sunday (we find out later that he is 14).
The vivid opening engages our interest immediately — what can be the
reason for this activity? There is a clue in the third paragraph: Daddy is
scrutinising the classified section of the newspaper. in combination with the
final line ofthe extract, it suggests that Daddy is removing his white hairs so
that he looks younger and more eligible for anyjob that he may spy in the
classified adverts. The first—person narrator is observant and imaginative:
he describes the effect ofthe light bulb on the tweezers and the calendar
with its Baby picture. This observation helps to set the scene — they are not
a rich family ifthe bulb is bare, and the father is seeking work. We feel the

 

 

  

w . . «*MAW.W~¢H m» .* James Joyce-

ACTIVITY 8.2

Choose one of the prose
works whose ﬁrst paragraph
has interested you and try
reading the complete work.
Are your ﬁrst impressions

- borne out in the novel or
story as a whole?

   

TIP

Even the smallest section of
a novel can give you a sense
0fthe writer’s concerns and
methods of working. Pay
attention to the detail, and

the [alga picture will emerge
clearly,

V'rhp'mon;m1a§~wwgnumwWIPE

 

Unit 8: Prose - opening paragraphs

son’s irritation and distaste at having to do thisjob every Sunday. Although

a short story, this is a miniature coming-of—age narrative. By the end ofthe
story, his criticisms of his parents and his limited viewpoint have broadened
into an appreciation of his family and an awareness oftime passing, change
and mortality. Note the very naturalistic conversation which opens the story
and prepares us for a story of personalities interacting in a family.

The narrator uses the voice and limited speech register of a very small
child, suggesting that this will be an autobiographical novel, beginning at
the very beginning of the life in question. it is in the third person, but the
narration is very close to the sense impressions of the small child, with
references to the smell of the oilcloth, wetting the bed, to the implied feel
of a hairy beard, the taste of lemon platt (lemon—flavoured sweets), the
sounds of music and clapping. Childish words are used such as moocow,
nicens, tuckoo, and simple sentence structures of subject, verb and object
with no subordinate clauses, to emulate the immature thought processes
of the child. Older people have particular associations for the small child:
his mother smells nicer than his father and he seems closer to her; Betty
Byrne is notable for what she sells that is a treat for the child; he notices
that his uncle is olderthan Dante.

Compare this with the opening of Great Expectations above. Pip is
only a child, but his thoughts are expressed in long, complex, rhythmical
sentences by Dickens — there is no attempt to imitate the speech patterns
of a young child.

The woman in the passage is in the final stage of her pregnancy. She

is making herself something to eat, mixing the ingredients which are
nearest to those she remembers from the place she came from « India.
The prose is written in the third person, but the narrator is very close to
Ashima’s thoughts and action, enhanced by her use of the present tense.
We can envisage her little concoction of food (a craving she experiences
because of her pregnancy), even as she is making it. The images of food
and cooking activity are clear and precise, but the passage takes us way
beyond her apartment in Central Square with its kitchen and its neat
countertop and hanging utensils into the Calcutta pavements and railway
platforms: images ofspace and travel far away, where the food she is
trying to emulate is sold outdoors for a few coins and presented to you in
a piece of newspaper. The contrast between the two worlds is made very
striking (suggested in the small phrase ‘Calcutta sidewalk’: a place in india
coupled with the US word for ‘pavement’). Her ingredients are American
ones, named by the writer: Rice Krispies and Planter’s peanuts, and they
are not quite sufficient for what she craves — a taste ofthe old country from
which she came. Ethnic food is often a symbol in post—colonial fiction for
what is missing in the immigrant experience — the basic stuff of life with all
its traditional connotations, the ingredients of which are difficult to find in
the new country. in addition to the food preparation, the writer stresses
the woman’s physical discomfort: craves, sweat, swollen, ache. This novel
beginning with a pregnancy, close to the time of the child’s birth, takes
the reader back even further in the main character’s life than the previous
example. The protagonist is about to be born, into a household the

roots of whose culture are elsewhere, trying to adapt to the new country
which has taken the family in. The importance of names, of suffering, of
displacement: these are the very concerns of the novel as it unfolds.

 

/

 

59