Unit 19: Poetry passage questions

Unit 19: Poetry passage questions

An A Level passage question on poetry involves a close critical analysis of a
the different methods of complete poem from one of your poetry set texts, or an extract of some 30 lines if
taoChmg passage questions it is from a longer poem (such as one of Keats’s narratives). You’ll need to do the
:28 of this book. analysis and relate what you say to two other poems from the same selection. In
this Unit there are sample responses to help you to see how it’s done.

Passage question 1: Christina Rossetti

Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the following poem, relating it
to two other poems by Rossetti in your selection.

Does the road wind up—hill all the way?
Yes, to the very end. .

Will the day’s journey take the whole long day?
From morn to night, my friend.

But is there for the night a resting—place?
A roof for when the slow dark hours begin.
May not the darkness hide it from my face?
You cannot miss that inn.

Shall I meet other wayfarers at night?
Those who have gone before.

Then must I knock, or call when just in sight?
They will not keep you standing at that door.

Shall I ﬁnd comfort, travel-sore and weak?
Of labour you shall ﬁnd the sum.
Will there be beds for me and all who seek?

Yea, beds for all who come.

Christina Rossetti Up—hill (1858)

 

(The introduction and conclusion have been written in full, the main body
presented in note form.)

Introduction

in Up-hill, Rossetti does not directly discuss Christ and his life as she does

in many of her other religious poems. The poem is, rather, based on the
extended metaphor of life as a spiritual journey, which takes all day and ends
with rest at an inn at night. Perhaps the most striking aspect of the poem is its
use of question and answer form, with the questioner asking for reassurance
about the end ofthejourney. Readers may, however, respond differently to
the tone ofthe poem, some finding it encouraging, but others less so. The twoCambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

other poems l have selected to discuss, A Christmas Carol and Good Friday, are l
r— directly about Christ — his birth and his crucifixion.

Main body 1: Up-hill
I Spiritualjourney+ examples
I Question and answer form + tone: could be ambiguous?
I Effect of regular patterns, rhythm and rhyme
I Comment on some diction, for exampleyea
~ I Effect on reader — is it reassuring, or rather sinister and mysterious?

Main body 2: A Christmas Carol

I Very different from Up—h/ll— more imaginative imagery, stronger

W confidence, no ambiguity

Winter — sense images of sound and sight

Repetition ofwords for emphasis 1,

Contrast between the heavenly and cosmic importance of Christ / very i

humble and domestic image of the baby in the manger — tone very

important

The poet’s personal contribution: the ‘l’ enters the poem

The regular metrical scheme in eight—line stanzas and rhyme abcbdefe and

the emphatic short last lines — strong, calm and confident tone

I Contrast is used, as in Up-hi/l, but it is not between two different speakers,
rather the baby Christ with his mother/ his eternal significance

Main body 3: Good Friday
I Another strong contrast ~ poet’s anguished questions and exclamations,

I Metaphor of herself as stone — hard and apparently unfeeling I, '

I Uses parallelism: Notso used four times emphasises her difference "

I Regular stanza form with its shorter first and fourth lines and more
expansive second and third lines, rhyming abba, different effect

I Biblical reference (as in previous poem): she wants Christ, greater than

Moses, to look at her and crack her stone-like exterior
-\W I In this, as in A Christmas Carol, the speaker is shown as inadequate

Conclusion

These three poems all reveal Rossetti’s profound faith and trust in God. The
events in the life of Jesus are evidently important to her and her response is

a strongly personal one, often passionate, though not in Up—hi/l. She uses a
variety of verse forms — usually regular but in distinctive forms, such as the
dialogue, giving clear emphasis in the verse to the important lines in the poems’

 

 

 

 

 

‘7Am I a stone and not a sheep

That I can stand, 0 Christ, beneath Thy Cross,
To number drop by drop Thy Blood’s slow loss,
And yet not weep?

Not so those women loved

Who with exceeding grief lamented Thee;
Not so fallen Peter weeping bitterly;

Not so the thief was moved;

Not so the Sun and Moon

Unit 19: Poetry passage questions

In the bleak mid—winter

Frosty wind made moan,

Earth stood hard as iron,
Water like a stone;

Snow had fallen, snow on snow,
Snow on snow,

In the bleak mid—winter

Long ago.

Our God, Heaven cannot hold Him
Nor earth sustain;

J

 

Which hid their faces in a starless sky,
A horror of great darkness at broad noon—

Heaven and earth shall ﬂee away
When He comes to reign:

I, only I. In the bleak mid—winter

A stable-place suﬂiced
Yet give not o’er, The Lord God Almighty
But seek Thy sheep, true Shepherd of the ﬂock; Jesus Christ

Greater than Moses, turn and look once more

A d .t m k Two stanzas from Christina Rossetti
n smiea c .

A Christmas Carol (1872)
Christina Rossetti Good Friday (1896)

143

m, l I ’ Passage question 2: Philip Larkin

It is always useful to practise

different essay types so that
you can remain flexible in
your approach and thinking.

Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the following poem, relating it
to two other poems by Larkin in your selection.

(It is printed in full, so if you are not studying Larkin, you can appreciate
the exercise anyway.)

 

Home is so sad. It stays as it was left,
Shaped to the comfort of the last to go
As if to win them back. Instead, bereft
Of anyone to please, it withers so,
Having no heart to put aside the theft

And turn again to what it started as,

A joyous shot at how things ought to be,
Long fallen wide. You can see how it was:
Look at the pictures and the cutlery.

The music in the piano stool. That vase.

Philip Larkin Home is so Sad (1958)144

 

 

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

 

 

 

SAMPLE ESSAY 2

 

 

 

The poem begins with a very surprising, indeed paradoxical, statement: Home
is so Sad, seemingly the reverse of what most people may feel. But the poem
goes on to express the pathos ofthe home environment, emphasising how the
passage of time has left it sterile and unchanged. Time has passed and stolen
the family away, so that home has no heart to put aside the theft and go back
to being a more vibrant place. The objects in the house seem pathetic, mere
relics of a past time that was better: You can see how it was.

Although the language used is relatively simple, it is very effective. The
poet uses a kind of personification for the house, or at least makes it seem
alive, with its persuasions to the family to return as ifto win them back, but it
has now wither[ed] in its abandonment. There is a strong contrast between
the diction used in stanza 1 (sad, bereft, withers) and the powerful adjective
joyous to describe how things used to be. The objects in the house are isolated
images — pictures, cutlery, music in the piano stool — all suggesting a previous
life which had more vitality: perhaps photos of the family, shared meals,
music being played — now tucked away. Look at is an imperative which tells
the reader to examine the objects closely, as if to say: don’t miss any of the
evidence l’m presenting to prove my point. The final phrase of the poem —
That vase — suggests an object which once had some history, a story to it, now
abandoned and meaningless.

The two stanzas with their short lines are regular, with the first stanza
rhyming fully (ababa) but in the second the rhyme breaks down into half-
rhymes — as, was, vase and be and cutlery, as if to mirror the withering of the
~ home into the final bathos of the last line.

Considering that the home is the centre of the family, the poem suggests
that the passage of time renders it a failure. Family members leave and the
I place they once made alive with their presence is now filled with meaningless
objects, unchanged and lifeless.

Another poem in which objects appear to symbolise a sad life deadened
with routine and failure is Mr Bleaney. it also has a domestic setting but here
it is a rented room, one which Mr Bleaney used to stay in but which now
the persona of the poem is renting. All the objects in the room have a tired
secondhand feeling about them: Flowered curtains, thin and frayed; Bed,
upright chair, sixty—watt bulb. There is nothing comfortable or luxurious here
and the speaker is constantly reminded of the previous inhabitant, when he
stubs his cigarette out on the same saucer—souvenir, and is forced to listen
to the samejabbering television set that Bleaney persuaded the landlady to
buy. The room is also defined by what it doesn’t have ~ no hook, no room for
books or bags. Critic J. D. McClatchy’s definition of Larkin’s poetry as about
stunted lives and spoiled desires seems apt here. Unlike the previous poem,
the objects which are there are not meaningless: their drab, impersonal,
utilitarian nature causes the persona to wonder how this environment
reflects on him; he begins to question his own identity. This shift to a more
philosophical questioning of his life takes place in the final stanza: the
speaker muses on whether how we live measures our own nature. Did Bleaney
with his unchanging habits and boring life warrant no better, and is he, by
extension, in the same situation? The poem is therefore similar to Home is so
Sad in its use of everyday objects to symbolise domestic life, but differs in its
final development, beyond the observation of the home and its contents into
« questioning one’s life and how one leads it.Unit 19: Poetry passage questions

These poems are sombre in tone, undermining domestic life and the family,
questioning their value and their contribution to a sense of personal identity.
Larkin did not always write such gloomy verse and the last poem 1 have
chosen, Water, is about an everyday commodity but one which assumes a
special importance in the way it is described here. The poem begins with

a speculation: lfl were called in to construct a religion. Not a very likely
occurrence, as Larkin was an atheist, and not in fact very likely in anyone’s
life. This sets the poem, from the very outset, as an imaginative flight of fancy.
lithe poet were called in, then he would use water as the centre of his religion.
Going to church would mean walking through water and needing dry clothes
afterwards, the change suggesting a transformative experience. Instead of
the customary words of the church service, the liturgy, he would use images
of being completely soaked: a furious devout drench, with the alliteration of
devout and drench linking the words fully. And finally, he uses imagery from
the Bible to make his point: he would raise in the east not a star as the wise
men followed, but a simple glass ofwoter, so that all the rays of light would

be attracted: any-angled light. instead of a congregation of people, as in

a church, the rays of light would congregate endlessly. The use of diction
connected with religion suits his theme, and this surprising little poem even
ends with a suggestion of eternity: endlessly.

These poems all use simple objects — a piano stool, a vase, an ashtray, a
glass of water — to express more complex ideas. in Home is so Sad, the reader
is faced with the paradox that home is not supportive and enabling; in Mr
Bleaney, ordinary things are seen as possibly giving an indication of our own
personal identity and worth; but in Water, the humble glass of water creates
an image of beauty and endlessness in which time and personal concerns all
fall away and become irrelevant.

 

 

j

 

‘This was Mr Bleaney’s room. He stayed He kept on plugging at the four aways —
The Whole time he was at the Bodies, till Likewise their yearly frame: the Frinton folk
They moved him.’ Flowered curtains, thin and frayed, Who put him up for summer holidays,
Fall to within ﬁve inches of the sill, And Christmas at his sister’s house in Stoke.
Whose window shows a strip of building land, But if he stood and watched the frigid wind
Tussocky, littered. ‘Mr Bleaney took Tousling the clouds, lay on the fusty bed
My bit of garden properly in hand.’ Telling himself that this was home, and grinned,
Bed, upright chair, sixty-watt bulb, no hook And shivered, without shaking off the dread
V: FEhind the door, no room for books or bags — That how we live measures our own nature,
 I,“ take it.’ So it happens that I lie And at his age having no more to show
5' Where Mr Bleaney lay, and stub my fags Than one hired box should make him pretty sure
. On the Same saucer-souvenir, and try He warranted no better, I don’t know.

   
   

v .1. ( Stufﬁn Philip Larkin MrBleaney (1964)
‘ Thej
Ikn

His

g my ears with cotton—wool, to drown
abbering set he egged her on to buy.

0W his habits — What time he came down,
Preference for sauce to gravy, whyCambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

i
|
If I were called in
l To construct a religion
I should make use of water.
I
|

Going to church
Would entail a fording
To dry, different clothes;

My liturgy would employ ', *’
Images of sousing,
A furious devout drench,

And I should raise in the east
A glass of water

Where any—angled light
Would congregate endlessly.

 
 
 

   

TIP

The domestic environment is
an important context to our
lives, revealing much about
our concerns and aspirations
Although these poems were
written aboutl50 years ago,

i

homes still have pictures E

m and cutlery; cheap rented §
accommodation can still be 

  
    

Philip Larkin Water (1964)

   

The sample essay on pages 144—5 has an effective essay structure

because it clearly responds to the question asked, both by writing

the critical appreciation and by referring relevantly to other related

poems. Close reference to the texts is also evident in this essay, with [I]
interpretations supported throughout.

COMMENT

very drab. ‘Context’ isn’tjust
about wars and politics.

Womb!

Answering passage questions

Answering Poetry passage questions may invite a different method from Prose
and Drama. When you write a passage question essay which begins with a critical
appreciation of a passage of prose or drama, you may wish to use a different
structure, writing your appreciation and incorporating wider reference as you go.
This is possible because you are writing about the same text: the passage is from the
novel or play you are studying. The exception to this may be Chaucer because his
works are poetry, but in the form of one longer poem. If you have studied 1712 Rape
of the Lock by Alexander Pope or some works by John Milton, the same applies.

In the two examples above, the essays are on separate poems — they may be by
the same writer but they are separate little texts, so it makes more sense to do it in
the way illustrated (main body paragraphs 1 + 2 + 3).

Below are two examples of essay titles on Chaucer where you could write
your critical appreciation ﬁrst and then bring in wider reference, or you could
incorporate wider reference as you go.

Passage question 3: Chaucer

You should always consider carefully the character who is speaking in The
Canterbury Tales, through either their Prologue or their Tale. Chaucer creates
characters in order to offer insight into human behaviour, so often what they sayChaucer’s language may
Seem challenging, but it is

an older version of modern
English, with many words the
same, just spelt differently.
Become familiar with it and
you will enjoy his perceptions
and delightful ironic humour.

Unit 19: Poetry passage questions

is both confessional (telling all about themselves) as well as thematic (showing
Chaucer’s wider concerns). If you are studying The Wife of Bath, the fact that she
seems to make a great many allusions to the Bible, as well as other authorities,
may seem unrealistic if you are judging from a purely characterisation point of
View. ‘How can she know all these things?’ you may ask yourself. Remember that
Chaucer is always the author behind her character, shaping the narrative to produce
a recognisable woman, as well as a way of discussing wider issues. This tension
means that his tales are always ironic, with the limited perspective of an individual
and a wider perspective behind it. Or, in the case of the Pardoner, his confessions
seem to be too honest about revealing his character and thus self—defeating. If he
tells his audience all his tricks, they won’t buy from him, so why does he do it?
To ask this question is to treat the Pardoner too much like a real person. He is a
creation of Chaucer, who again is shaping the Prologue and Tale to create a vivid
character as well as to raise wider issues. The Knight’s Tale is a story of knights
and ladies and battle told by a superior, upper-class fellow — the Knight — with
much experience of ‘noble’ deeds. But there are many poignant and even tragic
elements of the story which the Knight is not sensitive enough to grasp. Through
his narrative, Chaucer allows us, the readers, to see them even though the Knight is
not aware of them.

Students often forget that The Canterbury Tales are all written in verse. The

following are typical Chaucer passage questions, ﬁrst on The Wife of Bath’s Prologue
and secondly on The Pardoner’s Prologue.

 

Illustration of the Wife of Bath.

\i

147Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

l  The Wife of Bath
I *2 TIP

The language of the passage is
all—important and the starting-

. . Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the following passage relating
pornt for your analysrs.

it to Chaucer’s methods and reﬂects in the ‘Prologue’ and ‘Tale’ as a whole,

«weaaxumwmmm

KWWWWWWMW
And whan I saugh he wolde nevere ﬁne fine = finish
To reden on this cursed book al night,
Al sodeynly thre leves have I plight plight = pulled out
Out of his book, right as he radde, and eke
I with my fest so took him on the Cheke 5
That in oure fyr he ﬂl bakward adoun,
And he up stirte as dooth a wood leoun, wood = mad
And with his fest he smoot me on the heed, 
1 That in the ﬂoor I lay as I were deed. 
: And whan he saugh how stille that I lay 10 ’”
1 He was agast, and wolde han ﬂed his way,
i Till atte laste out of my swogh I breyde, my swogh I breyde
l ‘O, hastow slain me false theef?’ I seyde, = awoke out of my swoon
l ‘And for my land thus hastow mordred me?
; Er I be deed, yet wol I kisse thee.’ 15
1 And neer he cam, and kneled faire adoun,
And seyde, ‘Deere suster Alisoun,
As help me God! I shal thee nevere smite.

That I have doon, it is thyself to wite. wite : blame
Foryeve it me, and that I thee bisekel’ 20

And yet eftsoones I hitte him on the cheke, eftsoones = immediately after
And seyde, ‘Theef, thus muchel am I wreke; wreke = revenged
Now wol I die, I may no longer speke.’

But atte laste, with muchel care and wo, We fiile acorded by us selven two
We ﬁlle acorded by us selven two. 25 = we were reconciled
He yaf me al the bridel in myn hond. yaf= gave
To han the governance of hous and loud, of his tonge, and of his hand
And ofhis tonge, and ofhis hond also; =what he said and did
And made him brenne his book anon right tho. brenne = burn
And whan that I hadde geten unto me, 30

By maistrie, all the soverainetee, maistrie = victory
And that he seyde, ‘Myn owene trewe wyf, soverainetee = supremacy
Do as thee lust the terme of al thy lyf; lust = want
Keep thyn honour, and keep eek myn estaat’ — estaat = rank
After that day we hadden never debaat. 35

An extract from Geoffrey Chaucer (born c.1343) The Wife ofBath’s Prologue from
The Canterbury Tales

ACTIVITY 19.2

Consider the following points, which take you to a detailed consideration of
the language of the passage, which is all-important in any passage question.

\TUnit 19: Poetry passage questions

Theme

This passage follows a 70—line or so summary of the book of wikked
wyves which her husband is reading, which she says has given her wo
and pine. It is the Wife’s account of her ﬁnal argument with Iankin,
which results in her achieving dominance over him, so the theme of
maistrie and soverainitee are the climax of the passage. Not long after
this she tells her Tale.

COMMENT

Presentation 0f events and tone

I The wife is here recounting an incident full of action. How would
you describe her tone of voice as she describes the incident? Is there
a change when she comes to line 24?

How is direct speech used to develop the story?

Do you ﬁnd any irony in the Wife’s account of herself lying on the
ﬂoor as I were deed? (How did she know about Iankin’s reaction, for
example?)

Is there any other obvious irony in the passage? (Look at line 35.)

Can you see any elements of knockabout farce in this account? If so,
how are they achieved?

Figures of speech and diction

I Can you ﬁnd any metaphorical language? What do you conclude
from this? (I found one simile and one metaphor. Here’s a tip for the
metaphor: He yaf me al the bridel. What is being compared to what?)

Are there any descriptive words?

What do you notice about the diction connected with the action?
(e.g. fest, cheke, stirte, smote)

What little word is used repeatedly to advance the action and to
introduce parallelism? Consider some of the effects of this.

Do you ﬁnd antithesis used for effect in the passage?
Do you ﬁnd hyperbole (exaggeration) used for effect in the passage?

What kind of words are these: governance, maistrie, soverainetee,
honour, estaat? What effect do these abstract concepts have at the
climax of a story of action?

Effects of the verse form and sound effects

I Rhythmically the extract has a very regular rhythm and rhyme.
'np ' Consider the effect of this overall, ﬁnding some examples to support

In answering passage your point. What can you say about the pace?

Questions on Chaucer which Can you see any examples of alliteration and assonance which
Irivolve lengthy Prologues link and emphasise particular words and phrases? Are there any

as We” as Tales) YOU ShOUld onomatopoeic words?
always make sure that you

refe .
magi??? 32th: Pfssage ' Relating to the Tale as a whole
m e re 0 ue,
don’t neglect the Tale ii your There are a number of points you could make here.

Wider Comments, and vice I, . The wife has earlier informed the pilgrims for half so bolder kan ther

Vers .
a' no man / Swere and lyen, as a woman kan. We see her here belng veryCambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

l devious and manipulative (but on the other hand, Iankin’s behavim1r

I is extremely provocativel), accusing Iankin when it was she who
started the ﬁght, and then claiming to be on the point of death.

‘ I The total submission at the end of this passage sums up the Wife’s
desire for dominance and, for that matter, the theme of the Tale
which follows. Her comments on maistrie and soverainetee lead
directly into the Tale, which is also linked with this passage by
Violent action (the rape of the girl). ‘

I ihe style is lively, bold and amusing, with action and direct speech, 

There are no examples here of the Wife’s quoting of authorities such 
as the Bible, nor of her descriptions of her previous marriages, which
we have seen elsewhere in the Prologue and Tale.  .

 

 

The Pardoner

Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the following passage, relating
it to Chaucer’s methods and eﬁ‘ects in the ‘Prologue’ and ‘Tale’ as a whole.

Corrupt was al this world for glotonye.

Adam oure fader, and his wyf also,

Fro Paradis to labour and to W0

Were driven for that vice, it is no drede. 10 no drede = no doubt
For Whil that Adam fasted, as I rede,

He was in Paradis; and whan that he

0 glotonye, ful of cursednesse! glotonye = greed

0 cause ﬁrst of oure confusioun!

0 original of oure dampnacioun,

Til Crist hadde boght us with his blood again!

L0, how deere, shortly for to sayn, 5 how deere = how dearly bought
I Aboght was thilke cursed vileynye — thilke = the same

Eet of the fruit deffended on the tree, deffended = hanging on
Anon he was out cast to we and peyne. peyne = pain
0 glotonye, on thee wel oghte us pleyne! 15 oghte us pleyne
O, wiste a man how manye maladies = we ought to complain
Folwen of excesse and of glotonies, wiste = if he knew
He wolde been the moore mesurable mesurable = moderate
Of his diete, sittinge at his table.

Allas, the shorte throte, the tendre mouth, 20

Maketh that est and west and north and south,

In erthe, in eir, in water, men to swinke swinke = work hard
T o gete a glotoun deyntee mete and drinke!

Of this matiere, 0 Paul, wel kanstow trete: kanstow trete = can you treat

‘Mete unto wombe, and wombe eek unto mete, 25
Shal God destroyen bothe,’ as Paulus seith.1
Allas, a foul thing is it, by my feith,1 KEY TERMS V W W

’t 'onymy and synegdoché/ 

‘e two figures cit-Speechthat - - _
ften deﬁne: Bo V i

ate one thingto something < V

l as with metaphonbut‘: ‘ * '

necdoche substitutes the

rt for the whole or the whole

:rone of its parts; metonymy,

hstitutes something closely-

ed, not part of the thing

,y ribed. The Pardon-er uses '

ne'cdoche when he‘speaks L

e mouth-and throat-for-the» _

.ole body, but itca‘n; be usedin

etrarchan sonnet too, when

eloved’s bodily attributes ’ 7

praised one by one,

   
  
  
 
  
   
    
   
   
     
 
    
    
  
   
   
  

lop by association, so that a
on’s clothes, ortheirchoice
food in a restaurant, may say '
ething about their nature.

are used in everyday"

ch a great deal, fOr example
sels’ forthe European

h, orthe famous saying

en is mightier than the

d, Where the objects refer to

ract concepts of peace and

Unit 19: Poetry passage questions

To seye this word, and fouler is the dede,

Whan man so drinketh of the White and rede
That of his throte he maketh his privee 30
Thurgh thilke cursed superﬂuitee.

privee = toilet

superfluitee = excessiveness

1 meat for the belly and the belly for meat and God will destroy both.

ACTIVITY 19.3

Consider the following points, which take you to a detailed consideration of
the language of the passage.

COMMENT

Theme

This is part of the Pardoner’s sermon on the evils of gluttony, intended
to persuade his audience to live a more restrained life.

Tone and style of speaking

I In lines 1, 2, 3, and I5 and 16, the Pardoner begins his utterance
with 0. What effect does this have and what does it suggest about his
style of address to the pilgrims ?

I What is the effect of words such as Allas and L0?

I The Pardoner uses the pronouns ‘us’ and ‘our’ rather than ‘you’ and
‘your’. What effect does this have on his preaching?

I When he adds in a phrase such as as I rede (line 11), and by myfeith
(line 27), what does this add to the speech?

Figures of speech

I The shorte throte, the tendre mouth (line 20) is an example of
synecdoche, the ﬁgure of speech where the part of something is
substituted for the whole. What effect does it have here to focus only
on the mouth and throat rather than the whole body?

I Lines 21 and 22 describe the efforts of those who have to provide
food and drink for the gluttons. What language effects are used to
emphasise this?

I In line 30, he uses a metaphor comparing a man’s throat to his
privee. What effect does this have?

I Overall, the imagery is very Vivid and physical, even repulsive. How
does this add to the persuasive quality of his speech?

Diction and biblical allusions

I There are a couple of biblical allusions in this extract. Look again at
lines 4—11. What is the Pardoner implying about the story of Adam
and Eve? Is this what the Bible actually says? What effect does his

L Islant on the story have? In lines 25—26, he quotes Paul from the
Bible. What effect does this have?

151Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

l ﬁrmm
! %

 

  

I What impression do you gain of his audience from this?
The Wife of Bath and the I Consider his use of diction. What effect does the use of the following 3
words have: cursednesse, confusioun, dampnacioun, villeynye,

glotonye, deyntee,foul?

Pardoner are both examples
ofimperfect or unreliable
narrators, such as we have
seen in later prose fiction.
There will always be irony

in the presentation of such

f

S

; Effects of the verse form and sound effects
I different points of view.

3‘

2

i

I Rhythmically the extract has a very regular rhythm and rhyme.
Consider the effect of this overall, and then try to ﬁnd examples
other than those above to show how this is made to sound more like
a dramatic speech.

Ifyou are studying one of
the Canterbury Tales, you

should try to read the General ' . _ .
prologue as we“ as some I Can you see any examples of alhteration and assonance whlch link

other Tales. You will gain and emphasise particular words and phrases?

a clear sense of Chaucer’s

concerns and methods. Relating to the Prologue and Tale as a whole
Reading a good modern
version can give you a feel
for this before you study the

There are a number of points you could make here.
I What is revealed 0f the Pardoner’s character here and in the rest

original, but remember _ it is of the Prologue? How far is he guilty of the sins that he preaches
the original you are studying! against?
Kim-wt"meme I His skill as a persuasive and compelling speaker — give further
examples.

I In what ways is this passage ironic? (Consider, as with the Wife of
Bath, the relationship between the speaker’s character and what he

E says and does.)
I The thematic links between what he preaches against here and the
Tale he tells of the three young men.

I The Tale he goes on to tell is riveting — Vivid, imaginative and
skilfully structured. What relationships can you ﬁnd between his
use of language here and his use of language in the Tale?

Writing — two methods

Essay Plan 1: Use your answers to the bullet point questions in both examples
above to make three or four main body paragraphs. Then add another paragraph
with further examples of similar features from the Prologue and Tale afterwards.
Write a suitable introduction and conclusion.

Essay Plan 2: Use your answers to the bullet point questions above to make
three or four main paragraphs. Find further examples of your points by ranging
more widely in the Prologue and Tale and include them at the end of the relevant
paragraphs. You have, in this way, shaped the main body of an essay which has
both useful textual detail and wider reference. Then write a suitable introduction
and conclusion.