Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Section 6: Drama 2

Unit 24: Drama critical essays

,.....,.W..WWWWWWE m

:5 Remember that plays were

written to be performed Read the following essay plans and re—order them into a form which Would

 not just read! you need to " be persuasive for the argument expressed. If you do not know the play, look
 use your imagination and closely to see if you can create a developing argument from the details giVen
 Visualise What is happening here. The essay title is a typical advanced question, but I also thought it would

as well as what is being said.

be fun to start by considering the signiﬁcance of characters who are playing
the parts of actors.
Essay title: Discuss the role and signiﬁcance of the travelling players in

 

Hamlet.
IRefer‘to the essay writing advice Hamlet essay plan 1
in Unlt27 in Part 3 ofthls book
and refresh your memory by A The travelling players show us more of Polonius, who claims to be quite an
looking again at the Drama units expert on theatrical genres and talks about acting when he was younger.
in Part 1 (Units 12—17). Being killed when he played Julius Caesar foreshadows his later murder by
Hamlet.
B Claudius’s reactions show he is deﬁnitely guilty.
C They show another side of Hamlet, which we would not see otherwise
I when they arrive: someone enthusiastic who knows a lot about acting.

D They tell us more about the Elizabethan theatre and the kinds of actors
and styles of acting that were current in Shakespeare’s day.

E The ﬁrst player’s acting makes Hamlet feel guilty that he has delayed so
long, and he tries to encourage himself in the 0 what a rogue soliloquy
which follows the players’ arrival.

F The play within the play and the dumb show are vivid, interesting
interludes for the audience, who are seeing enacted what they have only
had reported to them by the ghost before this point.

G The travelling players are extremely important to the plot and
characterisation of the play. It is they who stage The Murder of Gonzago,
which proves to Hamlet that Claudius really did murder his father and the
ghost was telling the truth.

H Hamlet sits next to Ophelia when they watch the play, and their dialogue
develops their relationship in the audience’s eyes.

Looking at these points, it seems to me that the best introduction
would be G, with perhaps F as the conclusion. If you used D as the
conclusion, it would be rather a weak ending — yes, they do tell us more
about the Elizabethan theatre, but it’s a contextual historical point

that doesn’t add much to our understanding of the play itself. As far

as the other topic sentences are concerned, they are all connected with
characterisation. You could either discuss Hamlet ﬁrst or leave him till
last. So, after G you could have C and E, which covers Hamlet’s initial

‘ '

COMMENTUnit 24: Drama critical essays

 

response to the players and his feelings after he has seen the ﬁrst player i
acting. Then Polonius, which is topic sentence A, then H which brings
in Ophelia, then B to discuss Claudius and his guilt. We are left with
D, which I think would be best discussed with C and incorporated into
the paragraph about Hamlet’s knowledge of acting and the theatre. We
end up with this order: G, C, D, E, A, H, B, F. If you wanted to switch
around the main body of the essay and talk about Polonius, Ophelia ;
and Claudius before Hamlet then it would be G, A, H, B, C, D, E, F. ,

 

211

 

A band of modern-day Shakespearean travelling players.

Hamlet essay plan 2 y

A The dumb show reminds the audience of what Claudius has done in a vivid 
and expressive visual form. Ideas come to life in it, and the words spoken ‘ 
by the Player King are very relevant, about purpose and how resolve fades l,
and also about the inconstancy of women.

B The players have a profound effect on Hamlet — they encourage his l
enthusiasm at ﬁrst, and his sense of guilt and ultimately his action: 0 what
a rogue and peasant slave am I; Yheplay’s the thing wherein I’ll catch the l I
conscience of the king. k

C Who are the guilty creatures sitting at a play? The players make you think l ‘
about the whole play and what insights it offers into life.

D There are many images and metaphors of putting on a show, painting, and
pretending. From the very beginning, Hamlet says: I have that within that
passeth show, these but the trappings and the suits ofwoe.

 

 

 

E The idea of pretence, being and seeming runs through the play, and the l
players, as performers, symbolise that. It is a play about acting of various
kinds — about the difference between appearance and reality.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

F Paradoxical situation. The actors are playing the part of actors and another :
set of actors are playing the part of kings, queens and courtiers watching
the ﬁrst group. Yet the truth of the murder comes out of this pretending,

Although this essay has fewer paragraphs than the previous one, it
contains some complex ideas, so I’ve given you a little more help with
what is in each paragraph. My order is E for the introduction and C for
the conclusion. My main body order is B, D, A, F, but you could put the
discussion of imagery before talking about Hamlet, so you might have
had E, D, B. However the idea of putting on a show leads nicely into the
dumb show in the next paragraph: so E, B, D, A, F, C.

COMMENT

ACTIVITY 24.2

Add quotations, discussion and discourse markers to your essay plan. A

useful critical quotation here would be from The World of Hamlet by Maynard

Mack: In the world of surfaces to which Shakespeare exposes as in ‘Hamlet’,

clothes are naturally a factor of importance. Clothing is an obvious symbol of
I the difference between outer surface and inner reality.

a TIP  ACTIVITY 24.3

Discussion of form, structure
and language will always
enhance any essay.

Discuss the relative merits of each essay. There is nothing wrong with Essay 1,
but it is focused on plot and characterisation. It contains little about language.
Essay 2 is more sophisticated in its attempts to consider the patterns of images
and the symbolism of the players. It is altogether more ambitious.

«nymsmmw 17.21:» mambo."

We... - 

g
i
i
i
i


This exercise reminds you that there are many different ways of
approaching an essay. I can envisage an essay which combines the
qualities of both, discussing characterisation in one longish paragraph
then moving on to discuss imagery.

COMMENT

     
  

TIP

You came across the idea of metafiction in Part 1 Prose, but it operates in a way here
too, in Shakespeare’s use of players and their created world to give insight within the
larger created world of Hamlet (which gives insight to us in the real world).Unit 24: Drama critical essays

ACTIVITY 24.4

Read the following essay plans and re~order them into a form which would
be persuasive for the argument expressed. If you do not know the play,

look closely to see if you can create a developing argument from the details
given here. Remember, you are trying to convince the reader of the essay

of your point of view. It would be helpful to review the advice giving on
essay structuring in Unit 27. There are three acts in the play, the ﬁrst set in

a restaurant where women are celebrating their achievements, the second in
the ofﬁce of the employment agency Top Girls, and the last in the kitchen of
Joyce, sister of Marlene.

Essay title: How far do you agree that in Top Girls women can only succeed
in a man’s world by sacrificing their humanity? (Top Girls, Caryl Churchill
1982)

Top Girls essay plan 1

A In the kitchen, the relationship of Joyce and Marlene is examined fully,
contrasting the life of the heartless career woman and the drudge who
has to undertake the care of her child permanently, taking menial jobs to
make ends meet.

B The waitress in the restaurant is ignored as a person and used. The use of
the technique of overlapping dialogue successfully undermines female
solidarity and basic humanity.

C Crucial aspects of humanity such as the capacity to love, care and feel, as
well as being a parent, are sacriﬁced in the name of success.

' D The hatred of the capitalist class and the working class for each other,

COMMENT

represented by the two sisters, takes the play to a political level, suggesting
the way that the capitalist class uses the workers. '

E In the ofﬁce, the sham of female success is exposed as the women who
have come to the Top Girls employment agency are not helped but treated
carelessly and without respect or humanity.

F Women are no better than men in their uncaring use of other women as
inferiors. They lose humanity, becoming dominant and patriarchal in
positions of authority.

G Act 1 brings together a host of women from history and literature whose
achievements have all come about at the expense of motherhood. Marlene
has abandoned her child to the care of her sister Joyce so that she can
pursue her career.

H All the play’s settings — Act 1, the restaurant; Act 2, the ofﬁce; and Act 3,
the domestic kitchen — show women oppressing each other and sacriﬁcing
humanity in their ambitious climb to the top.

I had C, G, H, B, E, A, D, F. Note that F and C could equally well
provide material for an introduction or conclusion. You need to have H
in front of B, E and A because they are about Acts 1, 2 and 3 of the play:
the restaurant (where the presence of the waitress gives the clue), the
Ofﬁce and the kitchen.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

213Marlene and Joyce in Top Girls.

Top Girls essay plan 2

A Marlene appears to be successful but is in fact unhappy, which we see
more clearly as the play progresses.

B Not all hope is lost — the younger generation suggests a different possible
future. Perhaps there are signs of hope for women’s lives, allowing for less
rigid choices.

C Women oppress each other, as we see in the employment agency Top Girls,
where the applicants are prevented from doing well.

D Women are torn between success in the workplace and success in the
domestic sphere — a conﬂict between capitalistic success and the ethics of
caring.

E Women have to sacriﬁce family love in order to succeed in the capitalist
workplace.

F Ibis is a dystopian play, showing a difference between the older and
younger generations.

1..

E 11115 essay has fewer paragraphs and a number of different answers
g could work. I had D, F, A, E, C, B. The ﬁrst and last paragraphs work
8 best this way, because D introduces the topic and B ends with an

interesting personal response, but the four paragraphs of the main body
could be in a different order.TIP

context: this play explores
feminist themes and is
notable for its refusal to
simplify the issues raised.
Although its political
dimension relates to a past
British Prime Minister, the
concepts explored are still
current.

Unit 24: Drama critical essays

 

ACTIVITY 24.5

Which of these two essays plans suggests a more developed and relevant essay
in answer to the question? The theatre critic Michael Billington made a useful
critical comment on what he sees as the main theme of Top Girls, which
could be quoted in this essay to support the points made: You can’t have true
feminism without a re—ordering of society.

COMMENT

The second essay is more general, not so focused on the question of
‘humanity’, more perhaps on ‘femininity’. The idea of a difference
between the generations is a useful one and could have been developed
to focus more closely on the question.

215