A, enema:

TIP

 You have been developing

: writing skills throughout
your course, and you are well
equipped. Remember, in an
exam it is not possible to say
everything about a poem in
the given time. What you do
write should be thoughtful,
well structured and well
illustrated. Don’t be so
carried away with technical
details that you forget to
say briefly what the poem is

[Revise the Poetry section in Part
land the guidelines in Units 29
and 30 in Part3 of this book.

W

Try Working out how best
t0 read this poem aloud,
emphasising the change of
tone, the lists, the stress on
there in line 12.

k

 

    

unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

Individual poems

Unseen poetry comment and analysis exercises are common in many advanced
exams. In this unit, you will be given a variety of examples of individual poems
with some suggested responses, and further suggestions for different ways of
handling the same question. The examples chosen have a variety of verse forms and
come from different eras. I’ve tried to include as many different kinds of poems as I
can. Some of them are probably a bit too demanding to be set in an exam, but they
do give you lots of hints on working and expressing your response.

TIP

Each poem creates its own world, which you are visiting and responding to. The
focus of all the units in Section 1, alsosummed up in Unit 29, are possible areas

for you to discuss, but they do not exist equally in every poem. Some poems

have many figures of speech, others hardly any. Some are structured around an
anecdote (or little story), others are reflective from the beginning. Some build to a
climax and have an increasingly fast pace, others are steady throughout, and so on.

 

Poem 1: Holy Sonnet by John Donne 153

Read the poem below and consider the questions which follow it, which help you
to respond to the language in detail. The angels referred to are the ﬁgures on the
corners of old maps, blowing trumpets, but here they also refer to the idea of the
Day of Judgement expressed in the Book of Revelations in the Bible, where the
dead are called to account. Noticing that this is a modiﬁed Petrarchan sonnet (see
Unit 3) which is divided into an octave and a sestet, will help you to trace the poet’s
thinking.

At the round earth’s imagined corners, blow

Your trumpets, angels, and arise, arise

From death, you numberless inﬁnities

Of souls, and to your scattered bodies go,

All Whom the ﬂood did, and ﬁre shall o’erthrow,
All Whom war, dearth, age, agues, tyrannies,
Despair, law, chance, hath slain, and you Whose eyes,
Shall behold God, and never taste death’s woe.
But let them sleep, Lord, and me mourn a space,
For, if above all these, my sins abound,

’Tis late to ask abundance of thy grace,

When we are there; here on this lowly ground,
Teach me how to repent; for that’s as good

As if thou hadst sealed my pardon, With thy blood.

dearth : famine;

agues = illnesses

John Donne (1572—1631) Holy SonnetCambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

    
  
 

I mmmwmﬁm‘mmmw . .7

I Who is the poet addressing in the ﬁrst eight lines when he uses the word you
(three different categories)?

I Who is he addressing in the ﬁnal six lines?

I How does the tone of the poem change at this point? (NB the volta).

I What are the verb form and tone of the verbs in the ﬁrst four lines, and what

‘ REMINDER

i Avolta isasudden change of
‘ direction or mood, especially
in a sonnet, either after line

A

    
 
 
 
 

  
 
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
     
 

       
 

8 (Petrarchan) or line 12 "
(Shakespeareany effect do they have? i
I The idea of the numberless inﬁnities of souls is developed by lists and by 
alliteration. Give details and consider the effect of this. Does the list of ways to 7
die move to a climax?
I Numberless inﬁnities is, in a sense, a repetition and you could have used one
TIP word or the other. What effect does this repetition have?
Havmg fome apprecmlﬁon I How does Donne use the contrast of the sky, the earth and, ﬁnally, the ground?
of the Bible and of ba5ic . . . . .
Christian belief would I Find some examples of enjambment (see Unlt 3) 1n the poem and c0nsrder the
be important here. The effects they create. It means that it is more irregular than a strict Petrarchan
variety of Donne’s poetic SOnnet-
output offers much room I The poem ends with a rhyming couplet which is more usual in a Shakespearean
for diSCUSSion 0f Contrast sonnet, but the poem is still divided into the eight/six line structure. How does
bu? 8.1“ his work’ Whgther this alteration of the conventions contribute to the effect of the ﬁnal lines?
religious or secular, is very
dramath and immediate, Answering these questions will help you to appreciate the passionate, dramatic
filled With startling images . , . .
and mnceits, paradoxes and tone of thls poem, one of Donne s Holy Sonnets. You can see how his mlnd ranges
intellectual concepts. H e uses around the earth and the heavens, and addresses God directly, asklng for pardon
the ﬁrst person but one must for his sins before the Day of Judgement, because it will be too late when they get
not make the assumption  there on the day itself. The combination of a huge canvas of earth and heaven,
u that he is Speaking 0f himself- talking to dead souls, telling angels what to do, but ﬁnally having a kind of lowly,
Sgggna: times be adopting humble conversation with God is distinctively the voice of Donne.
\ “mg; Poem 2: From Epistle to Mrs Teresa Blount by Alexander Pope
0w
A conceit is an extended
metaphor, which is often Read the following extract and analyse it.
ingenious and SophlStiCarted'A Note: Mrs Teresa Blount was a friend of Alexander Pope’s who was returning
persona is a We adopted by the to the country after being in London for the funeral of George 1 in 1714.
poet for effect.
She went to plain—work, and to purling brooks,
Old—fashioned halls, dull aunts, and croaking rooks;
She went from op’ra, park, assembly, play,
To morning walks, and pray’rs three hours a day; *3 ‘

To part her time ’tWiXt reading and bohea,1 5
To muse, and spill her solitary tea;

Or o’er cold coffee triﬂe With the spoon,

Count the slow clock, and dine exact at noon;

Divert her eyes With pictures in the ﬁre,

Hum half a tune, tell stories to the squire; 10
Up to her godly garret after sev’n,

There starve and pray, for that’s the way to heav’n.

Some squire, perhaps, you take delight to rack,

\Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

 

Whose game is Whisk, Whose treat a toast in sack;

Who Visits with a gun, presents you birds, 15
Then gives a smacking buss, and cries — ‘No words’;

Or with his hounds comes hallooing from the stable,

Makes love with nods, and knees beneath a table;

Whose laughs are hearty, though his jests are coarse,

And loves you best of all things — but his horse. 20

 

 

1 Bohea is a kind of strong tea. Both it and tea were pronounced with an ‘ay’ sound:
‘bohay’ and ‘tay’ in Pope’s day.

An extract from Alexander Pope (1688—1744) Epistle to Mrs Teresa Blount

 

Pope evidently feels his friend is going to be very bored now that she has

left London, and throughout the poem he offers the contrasts of town and
country in an amusing way. He doesn’t appear in the poem himself; these are
his observations; the first part of the extract is in the third person ‘she’, but he
moves to ‘you’ a little later on when he comes to matters of relationships.

Although there are some words which have a specific 18th century
meaning, the diction is not difficult to understand. Plain-work means ordinary
sewing rather than fancy embroidery, and the only purling, a word associated
in a pun with knitting (plain and purl), is in the little rivers of the countryside,
‘flowing’ being the other meaning of the word. immediately the plainness
and lack of sophistication of the countryside is established. The places and
people are old—fashioned and dull. Birds are croaking in the countryside,
but this implies by association that the people speak rather harshly too (an
implied transferred epithet). This transference is seen elsewhere too: her tea
is solitary, her coffee cold, just as she is in the country, without good company
to cheer her and warm her up. The clock seems to be slow because the time
moves so boringly, and she has her meals earlierthan they would be in
fashionable London.

Pope uses lists very effectively, to paint both the fun of London life: op’ra,
park, assembly, play, and its antithesis, the sheer boredom of the country:
morning walks, and pray’rs three hours a day. Later on, it will be: Up to her
godly garret after sev’n / There starve and pray, for that’s the way to heav’n.
When Pope progresses to the subject of her love life, moving into the second
person, he paints a picture of the country squire, coarse and loud: Who visits
,  r; a with a gun, presentsyou birds (nothing like flowers or delicate gifts, but dead
   birds that he’sjust shoti), plays cards (whisk) for a treat and actually prefers

t, I his horse to you. You can’t have a conversation with such a man: ‘No words’.
 Country life is thus satirised by Pope, making fun of its dull routines, its little
events, its boring and uncultured characters.

The light and amusing tone of the poem is promoted by its lines having a

u
U)
z
0
n.
U)
Lu
0:
Lu
.J
o.
2
<
m

 

155

 

 

 

 

 

 i", V  very regular metrical scheme of iambic pentameter and an aabb rhyme which
i  ' creates a complete idea in each couplet, neatly rounded off (heroic couplets,
iii a favourite form of Pope’s). in addition to this, the lines are often balanced

with a central caesura, giving balance and symmetry. The pace is steady
throughout. The antithesis of town and country is thus offered in a manner
reasonable and witty, polished and elegant, with rhymes which clinch each
point aptly and reinforce the humour (such as coarse and horse). in a sense,
the elegant, balanced form represents perfectly the civilised, cultured city life
which Pope evidently prefers.

 ., "

p .
°rtralt ofAlexander Pope.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

The. nameyAu,“  _ V
, ‘toa style of literature written ‘

  

an‘jisigiyjen ” "

' inthe periodibetweenaround[ ‘

* 1'69-Oanvd-Ig7’44(theyeari*  , _
' Alexand eri Pope aiedigwnters l
' imitated classical models '  . 1

and emphasised.order and

I rationality;ltissometirnes "

ViridicUle, Satire,

referred toras'th‘eNeorclassical
Age. ,' ,  _ _
“Satire'is a genre in Which'thesz ‘

follies, vices and shortcomings »
r of humankindare held up to.- g; 

. , étiy .
andindividualsusingwitand. 3
irony to point thecriticism. It L '
can Vary from 'vicious attackto
gentle, humorous disap-prOval. ’

TIP

y
love and close relationships,

a context which many of us
share. Poems do not have to
be about historical events to
have a context, though here a
past war is implied, as part of
the mother’s experience.

This is a poem about famil l

 

l
l

 

TIP

lfyou wanted to comment on the literary context ofthe poem, you would be able
to point to 18th century Augustanlsm very readily from the evidence of this poem.
There are no Romantic flights of fancy or passionate loves and hates. The lady
diverts her eyes with pictures in the ﬁre, but they are not too stirring, just pictures

lfyou have read T. S. Eliot’s poem The Love Song ofJ. Alfred Prufrock, you might
have remembered /have measured out my life with coffee spoons. Perhaps Eliot had
these lines of Pope in mind, though the poem is a very different one in theme and

Working with longer poems

At Advanced level, poets are sometimes set for study whose work includes longer
poems. Alexander Pope’s Rape of the Lock is an example. If you have been studying
Keats, you will know that in your selection there are longer works such as 7716 Eve of
St Agnes or Lamia. Sometimes longer poems are narratives: that is, they tell a story,
and you can consider the structure and development of such a poem as if it were a
short story in verse. However, you should not neglect poetic effects such as ﬁgures
of speech and poetic form, which are just as important as in shorter poems. A
longer work will allow the poet to develop approaches to her/his material for which
more space is required, such as satire.

Poem 3: The Letter by Miriam Lo

How it sits in his hands.

‘Who’s it from?’

Her son looks away.

‘Susan.’

Su—san. A girl’s name.

An Australian girl is writing to her son.

The coffeeshop patrons grow quiet.

Fat sizzles in the restaurant’s woks, upstairs.
Traﬂic roars round the corner.

Questions,

as if he is suddenly a stranger,

as if he has come from a far—away place,

sat down in strange clothes, demanding a coffee.

There! Her breath in the words of the letter.
A glimpse of the handwriting—

round, neat letters.

A faint outline of a person is starting to form.lects make it as care
id as a rhyme iambic

"’ ACTIVITY 20.3

Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

His mother thinks of how words
ﬂow out of a body and carry the ghost
of ﬁngers, a face, a heart.

She thinks of the words that have etched themselves
on the walls of her life: I surrender,

We are at war; the words that weigh heavily

on her tongue as she stands and watches

the face of her son: I love you, Come home.

Come Home.

But she cannot hold him, how quickly he slips from her gaze
to those words on the page

that are taking him away,

to a place she has no name for.

Miriam L0 The Letter (2004)

At ﬁrst sight, this is a very different poem from those by Donne and Pope. It is
written in free verse (see the Key Terms box for a reminder of what to look out for).

I d the poem carefully several times. Refer to the checklist for poetry in Unit 29 and then make notes for your
onse to the poem, using the table below to help you. (Revise the poetry units in Part 1 of this book if you

ubject and situation
is always useful to ask
’ourself these basic questions,

0 help you to enter the little
I orld created in the poem.

Because this is free verse,
considering the structure from
he very beginning will give you
he framework of the poem.

magery and figures of speech

Points to consider Your response

Start to think of the effect of these
elements of the poem as you pick
out your examples.

Who is the voice of the poem and what is she
doing?

What other characters are there? What are they
doing? Are they named?

Where is the poem set? Are there any other
settings and, if so, where are they?

Look at the time frame — is it all contemporary?
(Remember that memory can be very important.)

How many stanzas? What are the different
stages of the poem, represented in these
stanzas?

Find examples of short lines, enjambments,
repetitions or parallelism, direct speech.

It’s worth being meticulous about
this — how many times is the word
‘strange’ used, for example, or the
word ‘name’, with what effect?

There are not many metaphors in the poem,
though there is a significant one in stanza 5.

Her breath in the words of the letter — do
you remember what figure of speech this is
(one thing compared with another closely
connected with it)?

Irony — in what ways is the poem ironic?

Sense images: find examples of sight, sound,
touch — how do they help to create the setting?Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

 
 
   
 

  
 
  
 

 
  
  

  

Look at simple pronouns — is it a first person or
third person poem? Is it entirely focalised on
the speaker?

- Is it in the past or the present tense?

- How many words can you find that are ‘body’
words e.g. face, hands?

- Consider the effect of some of the repeated
words: away, faraway, strange, stranger, words.

- What is the effect ofsome ofthe other words

e.g. demanding a coffee?

Remember the effects of all your
observations.

Diction

 
 
 
 

 
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
 

 
  
  

   
  
 

Versification: rhythm, rhyme,
sound effects

Don’t neglect these because it is free verse.
There is some extremely effective use of
alliteration and assonance in this poem, which
links words in meaning as well as sound.

- Look closely at the last nine lines ofthe poem.
Find one example ofalliteration and one of
assonance.

- Can you find other instances of these effects in
the poem. Is there any onomatopoeia?

  
 
   
   
   
   
     
 
 

- Find some examples of particular emphasis in
the rhythm of the words.

  
 
 

  
 
 
 

  

Tone and atmosphere The poem is not in the first person, but it
is focalised on the mother’s thoughts and
feelings. What words could you use to describe

the tone of the poem?
- Atmosphere? How would you characterise this?

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

This is a poem about a mother whose grown-

up son is in a relationship with a woman from
another culture, another country. She knows that
she cannot keep him, and that the words ofthe
letter in his hands are drawing him away from
her. It is also a poem about the power of words
and their effects in our lives — they are what we
use to think and to talk.

How does the poet help you to empathise
with the mother in this poem? What aspects of
the poem do you find particularly effective in

evoking your sympathies?

 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
    
  
  
  

 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 

   
 
 

   
 
  

Where do your sympathies lie? You might consider her own past

life which has been very hard, with
experience of war (emphasised by
alliteration ofthe ‘w’ sound); her
sense of loss (emphasised by the
final pattern of assonance ofgaze,
page, taking away, place, name),
her imaginative recreation ofthe
girl from the shape of her words on

  
    
 
   
   
   
 
 

Bringing it all together: The detailed points you’ve found, expressed in the table
above, can be combined in any order and referred to brieﬂy. However, you need a
general introduction before you plunge into the detail.

I You could comment on the central ﬁgure of the mother and how sensitively her
feelings are expressed and evoked — very delicately, it seems to me.

I You could pick out the obvious theme of loss, of grown—up children leaving
home and making their own way with their chosen partners, who may be from
other cultures and other countries.

\”Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

 

I An interesting structural approach would be to focus on the way the poem
begins and ends on a similar but contrasting note: with the name Susan (or Sa—
san — neatly encapsulating another culture) and ends with no name; equally, it
also begins with what the son holds in his hands and ends with what the mother
cannot hold — him. This makes the poem’s structure cohesive.

I The theme of words and the way they make things and people real is very
imaginative, especially in the lines which suggest the shape of the letters gradually
forming the person who wrote them: words /ﬂow out of a body and carry the ghost
/ of ﬁngers, a face, a heart. These are particularly rhythmical lines, too.

Poem 4: Private Ground by Sylvia Plath (1932—63)

First frost, and Iwalk among the rose—fruit, the marble toes
Of the Greek beauties you brought

Off Europe’s relic heap

To sweeten your neck of the New York woods.

Soon each white lady will be boarded up

Against the cracking climate.

 
 
   
   
 

All morning, with smoking breath, the handyman
Has been draining the goldﬁsh ponds.

They collapse like lungs, the escaped water
Threading back, ﬁlament by ﬁlament, to the pure
Platonic table where it lives. The baby carp

Litter the mud like orangepeel.

 

TIP

‘Platonic’ in the second \
stanza means perfect, ideal.

Eleven weeks, and I know your estate so well

I need hardly go out at all.

A superhighway seals me off.

Trading their poisons, the north and south bound cars
Flatten the doped snakes to ribbon. In here, the grasses
Unload their griefs on my shoes,

The woods creak and ache, and the day forgets itself.

I bend over this drained basin where the small ﬁsh
Flex as the mud freezes.

They glitter like eyes, and I collect them all.

Morgue of old logs and old images, the lake

Opens and shuts, accepting them among its reﬂections.

Sylvia Plath Private Ground (1959)

ACTIVITY 20.4

Read and analyse the poem. Using the guidelines suggested in the left—
hand column of the table in Activity 20.3, see what you can make of this
poem, which follows the actions of the persona as she walks around the
large estate of the person to whom the poem is partly addressed at the
beginning, the ‘you’ of the poem.

159Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

i...
Z
I.”
E
2
O
U

The situation of the persona seems to be that she is alone on a grand
estate owned by someone who is not there, or if he is, is not around

in a meaningful way She knows the estate well and has been there for
eleven weeks, apparently without leaving it: I know your estate so well /
I need hardly go out at all (rather an odd comment — do we take walks
in order to get to know the details of our surroundings, or to enjoy
being out in the fresh air?), but evidently she has taken a lot of walks
and knows the whole estate well. She is seal[ed] of from the outside by
a superhighway. The estate seems to be being shut up for the winter —
the marble statues are being boarded up so that they are not spoilt by
frost, and the goldﬁsh ponds are being drained for the same reason.
(The water escapes down into some ‘perfeft’ place below the surface.)
The handyman doesn’t seem bothered about the death of the goldﬁsh
and the persona picks them up and puts them into the lake. The action
of the walk seems to cover a whole day, as the handyman is working
all morning and by the time she gets to the lake, the day forgets itself,
suggesting evening drawing in. Her attitude to the owner/s of the estate
is negative: they are rich if they can buy marble statues OﬁEurope’s
relic heap/T0 sweeten [their] neck of the New York woods. ‘Neck of the
woods’ is an informal expression meaning ‘your neighbourhood’, but
it also implies the size of the estate, with its lake and ponds, its statues
and woodland. It gives a sardonic tone to the ﬁrst stanza, implying
criticism. They haven’t given instructions to the handyman to save the
lives of the ﬁsh — the latter are expendable, not being worth a lot of
money like the Greek beauties. The persona’s action may save them, but
perhaps they are already dead, as the lake is compared metaphorically
with a morgue, a place for dead bodies.

which suggests a place which is not public, an estate which belongs
to someone. However, by implication, it also suggests one’s own

litter  like orangepeel; the doped snakes killed on the roads outside
the estate. These are disturbing images, suggesting by implication her
own suppression, her own expendability. The imagery and diction in
the poem contain many images of smothering or stiﬂing: the statues
(personiﬁed as animate) are boarded u ; the ponds collapse like lungs
(a horrible image of breathing being stiﬂed — healthy lungs are not
supposed to collapse); she is seal[ed] of; the lake is a morgue, opening
and shutting to accept bodies. (It IS contrasted with the pond waterUnit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

 

forgets itself, like an old person with dementia, its clarity and rationality
smothered. She is part of this environment, no longer a going concern,
but all being shut up and suffocated. Critic Anne Stevenson speaks of
the surreal landscape of the imprisoned psyche and this observation is
borne out in the poem. The ﬁsh which glitter like eyes perhaps suggests
a fear of being watched. From this we can deduce that this stay of eleven
weeks has not been a positive experience for her, though she shows us
this rather than tells us.

i The mood of the poem is sombre because of these images and the

l calm reﬂective tone of the persona. There are moments of colour — the

1 orange of the ﬁsh, for example — but the evocative sound effects of the
alliteration cracking climate, the grasses unload their griefs on my shoes,
the woods creak and ache all add to a disturbingly negative poem.
Her action with the ﬁsh could be seen as an attempt to do something
positive, or it could be her conﬁrming the death of the ﬁsh and laying
them to rest in a suitable place, the lake which has seen everything,
morgue of old logs and old images, the ambiguity of reﬂections meaning
‘thoughts’ as well as ‘light’.

I ﬁnd this poem very memorable: the imagery is so precise and

evocative, the mood so subtly negative. If you didn’t know who the poet
was, you could gain all of this from the words and images used.

161

TIP

Context: if you know some of the biography of the poet, Sylvia Plath, then you
might also see suicidal images here in the sense ofentrapment, loss of life and the
suppression of beauty and warmth. However, biographical contexts must be used
very sparingly or they become merely speculative. Plath wrote this while she was

staying at a writers’ retreat named Yaddo in the USA, which wealthy benefactors
had endowed; there were also plenty of other people around. Your contextual
‘knowledge’ here could be very misleading — her poetic imagination creates a quite
different effect from what she actually knew and saw around her.

Do you think the gender of the persona is obviously a woman or could it be a
man?

 

Another way of looking at the poem - environmental concerns

With its images of the superhighway, the doped snakes, the careless destruction of
the ﬁsh, the griefs of the grass, you could see this as an environmentally concerned
poem.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 20.5

Try to develop an essay on this poem with an emphasis on the destructiveness
of human activity. Do you ﬁnd it as convincing as the former interpretation?
Could you incorporate a paragraph on it into the previous essay?

TIP
Beginning with an anecdote and then moving outward into more philosophical

speculation is a common poetic strategy. Philip Larkin is a case in point, with
The Whitsun Weddings and Dockery and Son, for example. Elizabeth Bishop writes
similarly. Plath does not draw specific conclusions: she allows the poem to close
around itself like the lake, reflecting and suggesting, remaining in our minds.

 

Comparison of two unseen poems

Exercises which ask you to compare two unseen poems seem demanding. However,
the big advantage for you is that each poem helps you to understand the other, and
in looking for points of comparison and contrast, you discover elements in both
poems that you perhaps would not have noticed. Pairing two poems suggests that
they have something in common — the subject matter, the theme, perhaps some
language elements. When you’re planning your essay, you’ll be looking for these.
Read each poem carefully several times. Note any interesting words or phrases
and underline any obvious ﬁgures of speech as you go. Before considering how to

structure an essay of this kind, let’s look at a couple of poems and see how they
relate to each other.

162

     

   

TIP

Remember, you are looking for connections: do the poets use the same word or l
image? Do they have any similarities in their structure? Don’t forget you are also 
looking for contrast. Are they pursuing the same sort of idea but expressing it 3
; differently? Is the speaker’s tone completely different? Do the words in the poems 
3 create distinctive atmosphere which are entirely unlike each other? What effects
{ do these have? g

 

WWWWWQ‘WM

ACTIVITY 20.6

Unseen poem comparison 1

Compare the two following poems, Poem A, Villanelle, by William Empson
(1906—1984) and Poem B, Grief, by Carol Ann Duffy (1955—).Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

Poem A

It is the pain, it is the pain endures.

Your chemic beauty burned my muscles through.
Poise of my hands reminded me of yours. poise = balance, stability
What later purge from this deep toxin cures?

What kindness now could the old salve renew?

It is the pain, it is the pain endures.

The infection slept (custom or change inures) inures = becomes accustomed
And when pain’s secondary phase was due
Poise of my hands reminded me of yours.

to pain

How safe I felt, whom memory assures,
Rich that your grace safely by heart I knew.
It is the pain, it is the pain endures.

My stare drank deep beauty that still allures.
My heart pumps yet the poison draught of you.
Poise of my hands reminded me of yours.

You are still kind whom the same shape immures.
Kind and beyond adieu. We miss our cue.

It is the pain, it is the pain endures.

Poise of my hands reminded me of yours.

immures= shutsin

William Empson Villanel/e
Poem B

Grief, your gift, unwrapped,

my empty hands made heavy,

holding when they held you

like an ache; unlooked for,

though my eyes stare inward now

at where you were, my star, my star;

and undeserved, the perfect Choice

for one with everything, humbling

my heart; unwanted, too, my small voice
lost for words to thank you with; unusual,
how it, given, grows to ﬁll a day, a night,
a week, a month, teaching its text,

love’s spinster twin, my head bowed,
learning, learning; understood.

Carol Ann Duffy Grief(2005)

1530mm—

The villanelle is an old medieval
form, with ﬁve stanzas ofthree
lines followed by a quatrain. The
rhymes are interwoven and there
are only two ofthem throughout.
Theiirst andthird lines ofthe *
first stanza are repeated as
refrains at the end of each ofthe
following stanzas alternately '_
and then together in‘the final.
quatrain. lfyou don’t know the
name for this form, it‘doesn’t
matter, as long as you identify
the repetition and'the limited
rhyme scheme and the effects
they have.

Incremental repetition is

the name given to an effect of
repeated lines recurring again
and again, as here. Ballads often
have repeated lines ofthis kind. ~
meremento/ means ‘adding’ and
‘adding to the effect’.

COMMENT

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Comment on Poem A

The speaker in this poem is speaking of his painful feelings of loss

at the end of a relationship. The poem is addressed to ‘you’, the ex-
lover, who is still beautiful, but now distant, kind but no longer loving,
The relationship hasn’t lasted but the pain has. He uses an extended
metaphor of his love for her as like an infection — an illness which is
in his blood and cannot be cured. In fact, so powerful is it that it is
like a poison draught, a toxin. Every time his heart beats it is sending
the poison around his body. Coupled with this extended metaphor

is the poet’s use of the villanelle form, which involves a great deal of
repetition.

Here the villanelle’s repetitions are insistent and inescapable. They
convey well the obsessive mental suifering, the heartache and the
tyranny of memories, the ache of loss. But the poem also stresses the
physical throughout: the balance or positioning of his own hands which
remind him of hers all the time, because they were so physically close;
his muscles, burned by her poisonous beauty, his heart beating, her
physical appearance which is just the same on the outside — but she is
no longer the same inside. The circular form suggests the conﬁnement
of his situation.

Any more tricky aspects here are probably ones of vocabulary,
though you could guess from the context what a word like immures
means.

Comment on Poem B

Poem B is also a poem about loss and ‘grief’, as we see from its title. The
poem is also addressed to ‘you’ the ex—lover, and also has an extended
metaphor running through, signalled in the ﬁrst line: Grieﬁ your gift.
We expect a gift to be a delightful present, which gives pleasure on

a special occasion — here it is an unwanted wretched thing: the poet
wanted the relationship to continue and all she has left is the pain of
parting. The poem deserves close careful reading, particularly in its
sentence structure, which is probably the most demanding aspect of
the poem’s meaning. You’ll see that it’s all one sentence, separated by
semi-colons. Semi—colons are almost full stops, but not quite, giving the
sense of a relationship which is almost over, but not quite for the voice
of the poem. Running through the lines like a refrain is the preﬁx un:
may/rapped, Mlooked for, ﬂdeserved, Mwanted, ﬂusual; all negatives,
the opposite of all those positive feelings — wanted, deserved, usual —
which we would like in our relationships. Once the grief is unwrapped
and faced in the open, all the negative aspects of the situation crowd

in — it was unexpected, unlocked for, undeserved (the poet worshipped
the lover); unwanted certainly. But it is unusual too, not like a normal
gift because it keeps growing and ﬁlls the days and weeks, teaching

the persona left behind the terrible lessons of loss, which are ﬁnally
understood. The ﬁnal line with its understood links with all the other
negatives now — ‘to understand’ is to realise the relationship is over,Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

 

it’s now an ‘un—relationship’. The gift has become a lesson to be learned,
a grim metaphor, where grief has to be learned again and again (like
; one’s mathematical tables or spellings list). The fact that it is all in one
i sentence of 14 lines (but nothing like a love sonnet) makes the loss seem i E
l inescapable, the negatives cannot be avoided — they crowd in at regular
\ intervals leaving the persona with head bowed. The persona’s physical
‘ self runs through the poem too: my hands, my eyes, my heart, my small
 voice, culminating in my head.
1 The challenge here is reading the poem really carefully and noticing
i the structural links which bind the lines together.

Bringing the ideas together

If you were to jot down some similarities and differences between the
poems using the headings for the rows in the table in Activity 20.3, you
would come up with the following.

The voice is ﬁrst person (‘1’) addressing a former lover (‘you’) in both
poems. A sense of loss and grief runs through both poems, constantly
thinking of the loved one. Both poems are about a lover rejected and
the pain they feel.

Both poems use extended metaphor — infection and poison in Poem
A, a gift and a lesson in Poem B. Both refer to parts of the body and are
very physical, focused more on the speaker than the lover, though not
exclusively. Both poems focus on the hands, which are more signiﬁcant
in Poem A, as the speaker’s hands, so well known to him, remind him 1‘55
constantly of her hands which used to be with his and are now gone. In
Poem B, the hands are now empty of the lover, but heavy with the grief
of ‘the gift’.

Poem A is in the highly structured old form of the villanelle,
following its strict rules to create a sense of inescapable obsession. Poem
B seems an unstructured paragraph, but looked at more closely has
the an preﬁx, the negative running through the poem, as well as the
repetition of the speaker’s physical parts: my hands, my voice, and so on.

The tone of each poem is one of a kind of obsessive sadness, a
continuous reﬂection of innermost feelings of hurt and loss with an
atmosphere of grief. You may feel that the voice of Poem B is more
focused on herself, although she does call her lover my star. Poem A’s
voice is still much aﬁected by the beauty and grace of his lover and is
generous enough to say she is still kind to him.

ACTIVITY 20.7

Do you see any evidence that the personae of the poems are of
different genders? Justify your view in class.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 20.8

Now go to Part 3, Units 29 and 30, of this book and look at the two possible
methods for structuring and then writing your comparison. Try writing the
comparison as an essay.

'00 FURTHER READING

 

Today saw the last of my Spanish shampoo.
Lasted an age now that sharing with you,
such a thing of the past is.

Giant size. The brand

was always a compromise.

My new one’s tailored exactly to my needs.
Nonspill. Protein-rich.

Feeds body, promises to solve my problem hair.
Sweetheart, these days it’s hard to care,
But oh oh insomniac moonlight

how unhoneyed is my middle of the night.
I could see you

far enough. Beyond me

how we’ll get back together.

Campsites in Spain, moonlight,

heavy weather.

Today saw the end of my Spanish shampoo.
the end of my third month without you.

Liz Lochhead (b. 1947) The Empty Song

The tone here is an attempt at ﬁrst to be light-hearted. A giant-sized
bottle was always a sign of hope that it would be shared, but it hasn’t
worked out. She tries to console herself with the new bottle: no more
compromise; it’s perfect for her alone, tailored exactly to my needs;
promises to solve my problem hair. But her bravado breaks down
halfway: Sweetheart, these days it’s hard to care about the state of

her appearance, now that he’s gone. She misses him in the middle

of the night and imagines getting back together: campsites in Spain,
moonlight. But the heavy weather was an ominous Sign, and now he’s
gone. The form of the poem is apparently free, but there are rhymes and

COMMENT7 , ‘ KEYTERMS ,
silnter-textuality is the shaping

 

:, text. The olderword for a similar

Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

half—rhymes, and the poem begins and ends with a near—exact repetitive

 
   
 
 

couplet. Writing about the tone of this poem is, in some ways, more
complicated than either of the previous ones, as her attempts to be

fa tQXt meaning by anOther jokey are undercut by her sadness coming in. The language here is also
complex in another way, typical of much contemporary poetry in its
inter~textuality.

Lochhead, ﬁrst of all, employs the language of advertising when she
describes the effects of the shampoo: Giant size; nonspill; protein—rich;
feeds body; solve  problem hair. These are use ironically to suggest
the advantages she will now enjoy that she is on her own without the
compromise of a partner. How unhoneyed is my middle of the night is
a reference to the poem by John Keats, Tlhe Eve of St Agnes, where the
honey’d middle of the night is the time for the lovers Porphyro and
Madeleine to meet, before they run away. I can see some phrases which
have an atmosphere of song lyrics too: heavy weather; back together.
These references are enriching, linking the experience of the poem to
those suffered by other people, though there is irony in them. Was her
affair really like the classical lovers in The Eve of St Agnes? Well, it does

feel like it to you if you’re the one suffering.

ACTIVITY 20.9

Read and analyse. Have a look at the following pair of poems, on a completely
different subject.

nguage effect is allusion.

Unseen comparison 2

Compare and contrast the two following poems, Poem A The Shell by James
Stephens (1882—1950) and Poem B Relic by Ted Hughes (1930—1988).

And in the hush of waters was the sound
Of pebbles rolling round,

For ever rolling with a hollow sound.
And bubbling sea-weeds as the waters go
Swish to and fro

Their long, cold tentacles of slimy grey.
There was no day,

Nor ever came a night

Setting the stars alight

Poem A

And then I pressed the shell

Close to my ear

And listened well,

And straightaway like a bell

Came low and clear

The slow, sad murmur of the far distant seas,
Whipped by an icy breeze

Upon a shore

Wind-swept and desolate.

It was a sunless strand that never bore

The footprint of a man,

Nor felt the weight

Since time began

Of any human quality or stir

Save what the dreary winds and waves incur.

T o wonder at the moon:

Was twilight only and the frightened croon,
Smitten to whimpers, of the dreary wind
And waves that journeyed blind—

And then I loosed my ear 0, it was sweet
To hear a cart go jolting down the street.

James Stephens The Shell

 

167Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Poem B

I found this jawbone at the sea’s edge:
There, crabs, dogﬁsh, broken by the breakers or tossed

To ﬂap for half an hour and turn to a crust 
Continue the beginning. The deeps are cold: '
In that darkness camaraderie does not hold: 3 1

Nothing touches but, clutching, devours. And the jaws,
Before they are satisﬁed or their stretched purpose

Slacken, go down jaws; go gnawn bare. Jaws
Eat and are ﬁnished and the jawbone comes to the beach:

This is the sea’s achievement; With shells,
Vertebrae, claws, carapaces, skulls.

Time in the sea eats its tail, thrives, casts these

Indigestibles, the spars of purposes
That failed far from the surface. None grow rich
In the sea. This curved jawbone did not laugh

But gripped, gripped and is now a cenotaph.

Ted Hughes Relic (1960)

Comment on Poem A

The poem is written in the ﬁrst person (‘1’) and begins with his action
of putting a seashell close to his ear. (If you have neVer done this, it
makes a strange hollow sound, much as he describes in the poem.) He
imagines the sound of the sea, the windswept desolate shore and the
complete absence of human life, now or ever since time began. The only
life is that of the slimy seaweed (the tentacles suggest hostile life) and
the pebbles rolling round, the dreary wind blowing all the while. When
he takes the shell away from his ear, he hears a completely different
sound: the jolting of a cart going down the street, With all that that
implies of human beings and their busy, normal lives. Normal, busy,
everyday life ﬁlled with people is greatly preferable to the desolate waves
of the sea and the dreary wind blowing on the beach, as it has done
since the beginning of time.

The poem has a very insistent form, rhyming throughout, in
a pattern which interweaves until the ﬁnal lines when it rhymes
aabb. It has a regular iambic rhythm for the most part, but in lines
of varying lengths, which can be dramatically short, Or build to an
iambic pentameter: the example below illustrates the pattern which
has an almost chant—like rhythm and is very sinister in its inevitability.
The fact that the lines are of different lengths is quite disturbing and
unpredictable, perhaps mimicking the action of the waves on the beach j

COMMENT

going up and down. ‘Unit 20: Poetry Unseens and Comparisons

It was a sunless strand that never bore

The footprint of a man,

Nor felt the weight

Since time began

Of any human quality or stir

Save What the dreary Winds and waves incur.

Together with this is a consistent use of alliteration and assonance
throughout, for example: Smitten t0 whimpers, of the dreary wind. At
the end of the poem, the reader is reminded with a jolt that this is all in
the poet’s imagination. After all, it’s only a shell making a sound in his
ear, which reminds him of eternal desolate shores and seas.

Comment on Poem B

The poem begins in the ﬁrst person with the poet walking on the beach
and ﬁnding a jawbone: Ifound thisjawbone at the sea’s edge. But he does
not mention himself directly after this line, but reﬂects instead on the
life under the sea. The only other mentions of human life are indirect
ones at the end of the poem, where the poet claims: None grow rich /

In the sea. Human life may be aggressive, but some humans manage to
thrive at the expense of others. And the curve of the jawbone makes
him think of laughter, but this jawbone did not laugh: it was used for
gripping other creatures, and the word gripped is repeated to emphasise
it. The sea is rough and cold, and the creatures in it are only focused on
eating: Nothing touches but, clutching, devours, and then the bigger jaws
eat the smaller ones in an endless cycle of ‘eat and be eaten’. The sea’s
achievement is that it casts the bone up on the beach with all the other
relics of life below the surface. The poet personiﬁes Time, imagining it
as eating its tail and growing and thriving: a contrast with the creatures
who do not thrive or grow rich, or even survive. The bones and relics
are the indigestibles which are thrown up, the spars of purposes / That
failed far from the surface. There are two words used in the poem which
suggest human strife: one is camaraderie; the other cenotaph. Humans
ﬁght, but they often band together in a spirit of camaraderie against

a common enemy — unlike under the sea where it’s each creature for
itself. A cenotaph is a monument to the fallen, engraved with lots of
names, but the monument here is the jawbone, the single relic of a dead
creature which immortalises the laws of nature — implacable and harsh,
favouring no individuals at all.

The poem is written in three stanzas of ﬁve, six and ﬁve lines,
rhyming in the last couplet of each and with ten syllables in each line.
There are also some signiﬁcant half—rhymes, alliteration and assonance.
This regularity with reﬂective long lines emphasises the continuous
regular action of the sea and its inhabitants.

 

169Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

   ' ACTIVITYZOJO
 TIP

 When prepar'”g to make a Bringing the ideas together
g comparison,manystudents

 
       

 ﬁnd a table helpful.  First, revise the Poetry checklist in Unit 29 of this book. Now try to ﬁnd
“ésmwmm m, similarities and differences preparatory to writing an essay. You can use the
table below to help you.
Poem A Poem B

  

1 The poet holds the shell to his ear
and goes on an imaginative flight of
fancy about the desolate sound of
the sea, and his pleasure at finding
his own ordinary life is peopled by
others with busy lives. There are
no sea creatures mentioned. It is
entirely in the first person and the

past tense.

1 The poet is walking on the beach
and finds a jawbone which causes
him to reflect on the life under the
sea and its alienness compared
with human life in general. He only
speaks of himself in the poem’s first
line.

     
       
       
        
    
 

   
   

The poet contrasts everyday life and
human company with the eternal

desolateness of the world imaged in
the sea.

2 The poet reflects on the harsh
violence of the sea and the creatures
that live in it, each for itself, focused
on eating and being eaten.

 

 

 
       
 
  

     
 
 

A few personifications, many sound
images, which fits a poem which
begins with sound. Language —

day and night mentioned but no
differentiation. The shell is an image
for sound, not the empty husk of a
once live creature, as it is in poem B.

3 Images of eating, Time personified;
Many images oftouch, grasping,
clutching. A list of the body parts
thrown onto the beach by the sea:
shells/ Vertebrae, claws, carapaces,
skulls.

 
 
 
     
     

  
    

 
  

4 Goes from the sea shore and its
relics cast up on the beach to the
deeps ofthe sea, then to thoughts
on time and the pointlessness of
animal life.

4 Structure — goes from the first action
to the imagined world created, then
back to the real world.

 

     
      
 
 
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
 

   
    
  
  
    
  
  
 
 

   
 
  
 
   

One long stanza, rhyming, with
varied lines giving uncertain feeling,
assonance and alliteration.

Regular, three stanzas, reflective
ten—syllable lines, some half—rhyme,
some rhyme, assonance, alliteration.

  
   
   

6 Rather dramatic, considering that it
is an imagined scene created by an
imaginary sound.

Thoughtful, reflective,
uncompromising in his vision of the
harshness of nature and Time.

 
  
  
  
 

Try writing an essay about
the two poems using
these points, following the
guidelines in Part 3 of this
book.

You will ﬁnd an Unseen

This is a very atmospheric poem; a
kind of exercise in atmosphere, but
not particularly profound.

7 This is a harsh poem, farfrom the
pleasure of a day at the beach.
It creates a serious atmosphere,
reflecting on the harsh natural
world: even the world of ‘thejungle’
seems a friendlier place than
the undersea world with itsjaws
gripping each other.

 
      
 
      

comparison Ofa Poem and This is an exercise where you may be tempted to say which poem you prefer.
a Prose Passage at the end 0f They are very different: the ﬁrst one all about feeling and atmosphere, the
Unit 23' second one very grim and thought provoking.