Unit 29: Unseens

 

Unit 29: Unseens

Whether or not you have an Unseen critical exercise in your syllabus, being able to

look closely at and analyse a poem or passage of prose or drama you have never seen
before is an essential reading skill which will always be useful. Here is a checklist:

Poetry

1 Who is speaking, and who are they speaking to? (Look for personal pronouns: ‘I’,
‘you’, etc.) What situation are they in? Are they doing anything in the poem?

2 What does the poem seem to be about? Themes or main concerns? (You will need
to keep this in mind at all times when considering language effects.)

3 Language: ﬁgures of speech and diction, images of the senses.

4 Structure: how is the poem organised? Where does it begin, what happens next,
how and where does it conclude? Does it work up to a climax of some sort or
become more philosophical, moving from the particular to the general?

5 Verse form, metre, rhyme if there is any. Pace. Special sound effects such as
alliteration, onomatopoeia, and so on.

6 Linking with point 1, what tone of voice is the poem’s speaker using?
7 What sort of atmosphere is created through the words, images and tone used?

PFOSG

1 What is the subject matter? Is it descriptive? Does it concern people, and if so what
are they doing?

255 7

2 What are the main concerns of the writer? (You will need to keep this in mind at
' all times when considering language effects.)

3 Language: ﬁgures of speech and diction, images of the senses. Prose can be just

as rich in imagery as poetry. There may also be longer passages of description or
reﬂection than you ﬁnd in poetry.

4 Structure: how is the passage organised? Where does it begin, what happens next,
how and where does it conclude? Does it work up to a climax of some sort or
become more philosophical, moving from the particular to the general? Although
it will not be a complete work, it will have been chosen carefully to be cohesive.

5 Narrative position: is it ﬁrst or third person? Is it focalised on one character? Is
there any direct speech or free indirect? What tense is it written in? What effects
does this create?

6 Linking with point 5, what tone of voice is the narrator using?
7 Sentence structure: how varied is it and what effect does this have?
8 What sort of atmosphere is created through the words, images and tone used?

Drama

The words are in prose or poetry, so some of the above applies to dramatic dialogue.

1 What is happening? What do the stage directions indicate? Can you visualise
what happens in the scene? Remember the audience!

2 Who speaks and what do they say? Make a note of all the characters and consider
what they might be doing if not speaking.

3 Dramatic action: does it develop during the extract? Don’t neglect the second half
— it is just as important as the ﬁrst.

4 What are the main concerns of the dramatist in this extract?