Staging means the whole
process of realising a dramatic
work for performance.

Discuss and share your
experience of any play you

have seen, either in a ‘rhea‘tl‘e
or acted at school.

 

Plays are written to be performed by actors and watched by an audience, and this is

y the single most important difference between drama and the other literary forms.

When you read a novel or poem, it is usually a solitary activity (though of course
either form can be dramatised). The units in Section 3 on Drama are, intended to
help you get to grips with the dramatic form and the kinds of effects writers can
achieve when they write for an audience in the theatre. The plays you are studying
are theatrical pieces rather than writing for television or radio. If you have seen
your set play only on DVD, or in a cinema version, you should try to imagine how
it could be staged for live performance. The effect of seeing real people in real time
enacting a drama is very exciting.

You will either write an essay on an aspect of the play such as themes,
characterisation or the methods used by the playwright to express these, or have a
passage from your set play for close critical comment. Shakespeare is compulsory in
many syllabuses at this level, so there is wide coverage of his plays in this unit.

Full—length plays take between one and four hours and are usually watched at one
sitting. They are enthralling: going to the theatre is a great experience and always
involving, even if you are seeing a familiar play newly directed and performed by
a different cast. This helps to account for the way enthusiasts go to see the same
Shakespeare play again and again over the years. They want to experience yet
another, different, interpretation and see a fresh actor bring new life to a familiar
role.Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

 

strange, so thiatthe audience .

.S M

h

    

accepting them; The playwright
Bertolt BrechtilBQS—QSE)

popularised the term,i German

verfremdungseffekt'. »

0mm

Stage space is used to create
an illusion ofthe setting the
playwright wants to create.

The plot of the play and its structure

The experience of watching a play all at one sitting means that the work usually
has a kind of dynamic, rhythmical movement; change is activated, surprising and
complicating events occur, and expectancy and uncertainty are generated in the
audience as they watch. There are peaks and troughs of excitement, climaxes and
quieter moments. The audience may feel some satisfaction when a ﬁnal resolution
is reached. A strong and often complicated plot is a common feature of good
drama, because it must entertain and engage the audience from start to ﬁnish.
Even Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett, the modern classic once criticised
because nothing happens and nobody does anything, depends upon the audience’s ‘
expectation that there will be a plot, and their reaction to ﬁnding out that there isn’t
much of one. Some contemporary drama has indeed tried to move away from the
strongly plotted form and offer inconclusive, open—ended conclusions, but every
drama, including Waiting for Godot, has its moments of climax and excitement,
and endings do not have to have a wedding or a death to bring a play successfully
to a close. Every play will, however, have an expressive structure by which the
playwright shapes the dynamic process, communicating and exploring the major
issues of the play.

The characters

Characters are often used to engage the sympathies and involvement of the
audience; or they may represent ideas that the playwright would like the audience
to think about. In the latter case the characters need not be sympathetic or likeable:
indeed some dramatists have made characters deliberately unlikeable so that the
audience concentrates on the ideas and not the human sympathies.

Characters speak (in verse or prose) and at times they are silent. They do
things and they react to each other. As in prose writing, they may have qualities or
perform actions which are paralleled or contrasted with one-another to highlight
particular themes. Their motivation is the mainspring of the play’s plot.

When you are reading a play, rather than watching a performance, you need to
try to imagine the action. Ask yourself about the characters who are not speaking,
what might their reaction be to the events going on?

Effect on characters]
audience

 
    

  
  

  
  
   
  
  
    
   
 
 

  
  

The last scene of King Lear
(Shakespeare) — a tragedy

All the characters are
affected by the tragedy, as
is the audience.

The king’s three daughters
all lie dead in front of him.

 

    
   
    
  
  
 

    
   
  

 
   
   
  
  
 
  
 
 

The second act ofAbsurd
Person Singular (Alan
Ayckbourn) — a comedy

One ofthe characters is
trying to commit suicide in
various ways throughout.
She only speaks at the very
end ofthe act when she
starts to sing.

The others are completely
oblivious, missing her
pill—taking, setting up

a rope to hang herself,
sticking her head in the
gas oven, and so on. The
audience’s laughter grows
in intensity throughout
the act.

   
      

The setting/space

When you use the word setting to discuss a novel, it means the time(s) and place(s)
in which the action of the novel is set. The meaning of set in drama is more
speciﬁcally focused on the environment, or space, in which the actors perform.)r

y’ king with a classmate,

a short sequence from a
el or short story you are
ying, where characters

k to each other, and try
ake it into a scene from

ers’ words
ﬂy. The charact

become dialogue, set
with the name of each

‘: racter at the head of each

 

Unit 12: Studying a play

A naturalistc play creates space by using solid sets to make walls and rooms on
the stage, or even trees and rocks for an outside environment, but some plays use
more ﬂexible and imaginative forms.

Whether a play is performed in a traditional theatrical space with a stage set
and curtains, or in the middle of a room without scenery, or even read in class, it
has a setting for its action and this will be established by the playwright, either
by stage directions which give instructions or, like Shakespeare’s plays, in the
language spoken by characters. It could be a dining room or a forest, a temple or
a castle, an island, a bedroom or the deck of a ship. There may be special effects of
lighting or music, or spectacular ones such as thunder and lightning. The Norman
Conquests (1973) by Alan Ayckbourn is a series of three full—length plays, each
depicting the same six characters over the same weekend in a different part of
a house: so the setting for one is the dining room, another the living room, and
the third the garden. Each play is self-contained, and they may be watched in
any order, some of the scenes overlap, and on several occasions a character’s exit
from one play corresponds with an entrance in another. Every playwright will
make a choice of setting for the particular effect she/ he is aiming at. When you
are reading a play alone in your room, you have to use your imagination to
envisage the setting, and when you are writing in an exam, you mustn’t forget
that the text you are discussing is a play, meant for performance, not a text like
a novel.

The issues

Drama is a very effective medium for the exploration of domestic, social, political
and philosophical issues in an intense, highly charged atmosphere. Everything will

‘ be settled after a couple of hours — what Shakespeare calls ‘the two hours’ trafﬁc of

our stage’, so it has to be presented concisely. It is worth considering why a writer,
especially a contemporary one, has chosen to write a play rather than a novel, since
both could theoretically engage with the same themes. A play’s impact will be vivid,
immediate and powerful; its main concerns will be conveyed directly bythe actions
and reactions of a group of characters and there is no quiet or reﬂective description
as there can be in a novel. There is no omniscient narrator guiding the reader’s
observation, nor is there the single focus of a ﬁrst-person narrator, although
occasionally a character will speak directly to the audience. This can make conﬂict
on the stage particularly aggressive, love scenes extraordinarily tender and death
especially poignant, especially as the audience is looking at real people in real time.
Humour will make an audience laugh out loud in a way that rarely happens with
even a very amusing novel.

Accepted forms

Plays, particularly those of Shakespeare or plays written earlier, are often
categorised as comedy, tragedy, history, farce, and so on. They are at times given
a historical category, such as Restoration comedy. These categories are helpful in
a general way, but are only a guideline, since most tragedies have their humorous
moments, just as every comedy has more poignant ones; many historical dramas
are tragic, and many farces are satirical. Be prepared to redeﬁne the plays you are
studying, and keep an open mind.

 

85Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

A scene from Arthur Miller’s domestic drama Death ofa Salesman.

ACTIVITY 12.3

What sort of play are you studying? Write down where and when the action
takes place, and then say whether you think it is:

a drama of domestic or personal issues

an analytical, perhaps critical, comment on a particular kind of society
a play of moral dilemmas

a play of political insights

a play of philosophical questioning

or perhaps all of these!

Decide which kind of issue dominates the play.

Here is a table showing some examples of different types of plays:

Type of play

Domestic dramas

 

Death of a Salesman
(Arthur Miller)

Complex, fragile
relationships, especially
between father and son

Who’s Afraid of Virginia
Woolf? (Edward Albee)

A savage portrait of a
marriage

A Midsummer Night’s Dream
(Shakespeare)

An arranged marriage and
the conflicts that result

The Dilemma ofa Ghost
(Ama Ata Aidoo)

The suffocating influence
ofthe family on a marriageTIP

Take care that you do not
seek to categorise a play
too simply. You will find
that a domestic drama

can be socially perceptive;
that a social satire can
contain serious themes;
that a comedy can have
very poignant moments;
that a history play can be a
domestic drama, and so on.

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

in more detail in Unit 13.)

-  s 7-, ; ~14»:ﬂ$®,ejmmxmm

mamamsmxmmv‘mwmﬁe mammvwr-ﬂmnvﬁ‘j

(These themes are developed

kwwmwwwwmmﬂwmwmxmaq

w » w m» *thme

Plays of ideas

Plays of social analysis

Historical/political plays

After the Revolution (Amy
Herzog)

Top Girls (Caryl Churchill)

My Children! MyAfrica!
(Athol Fugard)

A Man forAll Seasons
(Robert Bolt)

Death and the King’s
Horseman (Wole Soyinka)

The Dilemma ofa Ghost
(Ama Ata Aidoo)

Mrs Warren’s Profession
(George Bernard Shaw)

The plays ofAthol Fugard

Restoration comedy

such as The Country Wife
(William Wycherley) or The
Way ofthe World (William
Congreve)

The Importance of Being
Earnest (Oscar Wilde)

A Man forA/l Seasons
(Robert Bolt)

Antony and Cleopatra
(Shakespeare)

Unit 12: Studying a play

The problems of political
idealism

Feminism

Apartheid in South Africa

Conscience and integrity

The importance of ritual in
the cohesion of society

Conflicts ofold and new in
Ghanaian society

Prostitution and society’s
hypocrisy

Critical presentation of
South Africa pre—
independence

Shrewd and comic
comments on social norms
and behaviour

Comic exploration of social
conventions

Exploration of the
complexities of politics and
morality

The qualities ofthe ‘real’
Thomas More and the ‘real’
Antony are not important
here.

Historical truth is not

the main point of these
plays. What matters is the
perception with which the
playwright approaches the
issues raised by the lives
of the famous, and in what
ways and how effectively
they are expressed in
dramatic form.

 

87