Referto the different methods of
approaching passage questions
in Unit28 ofthis book.

In answering passage questions at Advanced level
close analysis of a short extract to the methods and concerns of the whole: the novd
or group of short stories (for example, those of Katherine Mansﬁeld or James Joyce).

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

, you are required to relate your

characteristics, such as the novels by Adichie, seems a very far cry from writing
on two or three poems. Yet many areas for analysis are the same: structure, use

of language and imagery,
vital for appreciating a wr

tone, atmosphere, and so on. Close reading of prose is

effects discernible in a small section and these exercises will help you to develop

your skills. If you are not studying the

as Unseens.

Read closely the passage from Emma (1815) by Jane Austen and prepare to

analyse it.

Note: In the following passage, Emma is making a drawing of Harriet Smith.
She has convinced herself that Mr Elton is in love with Harriet. Mr Elton is
reading to them while Harriet sits and Emma draws.

Mr Elton was only too happy. Harriet listened,

and Emma drew in peace. She must allow him to

be still frequently coming to look; any thing less
would certainly have been too little in a lover; and

he was ready at the smallest intermission of the
pencil, to jump up and see the progress, and be
charmed—There was no being displeased with such
an encourager, for his admiration made him discern a
likeness almost before it was possible. She could not
respect his eye, but his love and his complaisance were
unexceptionable.

The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she
was quite enough pleased with the ﬁrst day’s sketch
to wish to go on. There was no want of likeness, she
had been fortunate in the attitude, and as she meant
to throw in a little improvement to the ﬁgure, to give
a little more height, and considerably more elegance,
she had great conﬁdence of its being in every way a
pretty drawing at last, and of its ﬁlling its destined
place with credit to them both—a standing memorial
of the beauty of one, the skill of the other, and the
friendship of both; with as many other agreeable

associations as Mr Elton’s very promising attachment
was likely to add.

Harriet was to sit again the next day; and Mr Elton,
just as he ought, entreated for the permission of
attending and reading to them again.

‘By all means. We shall be most happy to consider
you as one of the party.’

The same civilities and courtesies, the same
success and satisfaction, took place on the morrow,
and accompanied the whole progress of the picture,
which was rapid and happy. Every body who saw it
was pleased, but Mr Elton was in continual raptures,
and defended it through every criticism.

‘Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only
beauty she wanted,’—observed Mrs Weston to him—
not in the least suspecting that she was addressing a
lover.—‘The expression of the eye is most correct, but
Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes. It is
the fault of her face that she has them not.’

‘Do you think so?’ replied he. ‘I cannot agree
with you. It appears to me a most perfect
resemblance in every feature. I never saw such a

\

 

iter’s methods in detail. The focus here is on the kinds of

particular works mentioned here, use themlikeness in my life. We must allow for the effect of
shade, you know.’

‘You have made her too tall, Emma,’ said
Mr Knightley.

Emma knew that she had, but would not own it;
and Mr Elton warmly added,

‘Oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too
tall. Consider, she is sitting down—which naturally
presents a different—which in short gives exactly the
idea—and the proportions must be preserved, you
know. Proportions, fore—shortening—Oh no! it gives
one exactly the idea of such a height as Miss Smith’s.
Exactly so indeed!’

‘It is very pretty,’ said Mr Woodhouse. ‘So prettily
done! Just as your drawings always are, my dear. I do
not know any body who draws so well as you do. The
only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she seems to
be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over her
shoulders—and it makes one think she must catch cold.’

‘But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer;

a warm day in summer. Look at the tree.’

‘But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear.’

‘You, sir, may say any thing,’ cried Mr Elton, ‘but I
must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought,

Unit 22: Prose passage questions

the placing of Miss Smith out of doors; and the tree

is touched with such inimitable spirit! Any other
situation would have been much less in character. The
naiveté of Miss Smith’s manners—and altogether“
Oh, it is most admirable! I cannot keep my eyes from
it. I never saw such a likeness.’

The next thing wanted was to get the picture
framed; and here were a few diﬂiculties. It must be
done directly; it must be done in London; the order
must go through the hands of some intelligent person
whose taste could be depended on; and Isabella, the
usual doer of all commissions, must not be applied
to, because it was December, and Mr Woodhouse
could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her
house in the fogs of December. But no sooner was
the distress known to Mr Elton, than it was removed.
His gallantry was always on the alert. ‘Might he be
trusted with the commission, what inﬁnite pleasure
should he have in executing it! he could ride to
London at any time. It was impossible to say how
much he should be gratiﬁed by being employed on
such an errand.’

Jane Austen Emma (1815)

 

 

 

177178

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

'—
Z
I“
2
E
O
U

In»:swam/I4fowateummmrwxm‘meaﬂmrr

,wumammmvmmwwmw

mum-mamme

 TIP

Austen’s novels are very
popular and well known, not
least because ofthe number
of films and TV series which
have been based on them.
However, no filmed version
can capture the sharp wit and
ironic ambiguity ofAusten’s
prose style which is such a
delight.

.6
5
§
§
g
f
i
i
3

J

§
i
i

i
i
l

is...

 

Jane Austen’s prose is always worthy of close critical analysis. You can
pick any section of any of her novels and ﬁnd much to comment on. It is
not particularly rich in imagery, so you won’t ﬁnd complex metaphors.
Nonetheless, every sentence structure is worth analysing and her slyly
ironic tone underlies almost every paragraph, offering indirect criticism
and a great deal of humour. Dialogue is also used to great effect: every
character’s utterances are individualised with vocabulary and phrasing
entirely suitable to them. This may have encouraged the wealth of ﬁlm
versions of the novels as the sparkling dialogue is already here to adopt;
however these ﬁlms entirely lose the authorial point of View with its
subtly guiding tone.

As with a poem, it is helpful to consider the situation presented in
any extract from a novel or short story and the characters involved in it.
Emma is doing a portrait of Harriet, watched by Mr Elton. ‘The party’
additionally contains Mrs Weston (Emma’s former governess), Emma’s
father Mr Woodhouse and Mr Knightley. There is also reference to
Isabella, Emma’s sister who has married Mr Knightley’s brother. Not
all passages from novels have such an array of characters and so much
dialogue, so this is a very good place to start.

The passage is focalized (see page 49) from Emma’s point of View, with
her thoughts and feelings, but the novelist is able to suggest the characters
economically through their dialogue, as well as hinting at Emma’s
misunderstanding of the situation. Taking the characters in turn:

Harriet is the subject of the picture and here says nothing, though her
looks are discussed. (She is not a lively conversationalist and is, in fact,
illiterate.) She is evidently a pretty girl, but the ‘beauty’ which is referred
to in the second paragraph is very much Emma’s View and linked with
her own ‘skill’ and their ‘friendship’. Mrs Weston is more dispassionate
in her appraisal: Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty
she wanted (‘wanted’ here meaning ‘lacked’).

Mrs Weston is only mentioned in one paragraph and, as suggested
above, has judgement and is able to criticise Emma’s drawing, while
justifying Emma’s embellishment by reference to the relationship
between Emma and Harriet.

Mr Knightley has only one sentence, but it is in a paragraph of its own,
so particularly emphasised: You have made her too tall, Emma. As well
as suggesting that he is the only person who criticises Emma when

she deserves it, rather than lavishing praise on her, it could be seen

as a symbolic remark too: Emma is in the process of making Harriet
too tall, trying to arrange a marriage ‘above her station’ with someone
inappropriate. Mr Knightley’s laconic one-liner is juxtaposed (see page
89) with the effusions of Elton, but linked with Emma’s own realisation
of what she has done to the picture, suggesting their essential closeness.

Mr Woodhouse, Emma’s father, praises her highly, without reservation:
I do not know any body who draws so well as you do. But he is also
shown as a valetudinarian (someone who pessimistically focuses ona particular purpose or in a
particular social setting.

 

Register is language use’d’for' : '

Unit 22: Prose passage questions

matters of health all the time), constantly worrying whether he or
someone else will catch cold or some other illness. His characterisation
is humorous: it is never safe to sit out ofdoors, my dear as it shows
Austen’s use of exaggeration for effect (hyperbole) or even caricature.
However, his cautious approach to life, which later in the passage
prevents his other daughter Isabella from going to London to get the
picture framed (because it is winter and therefore foggy), suggests

a deadening, frustrating attitude which does not afford Emma any
healthy challenge or stimulation. In the novel generally, he hates change
and he hates marriage because it means change, and this moves him
beyond an amusing caricature into something more sinister. If you have
read the novel, you will know that it is Mr Knightley, rather than her
father, who provides Emma with the challenges she needs to grow as a
personality — but you might guess it from reading this extract carefully.

Mr Elton has a great deal to say here, which is presented both in direct
and indirect speech. He was only too happy, for example, which opens
the extract is indirect; Mr Elton, just as he ought, entreated for the
permission of attending and reading to them again is also indirect, and
the just as he ought shows clearly Emma’s point of view, because she
thinks a lover should want to be in the same room as the beloved. If
you look at his direct speech, you will see that it is often expressed in
disjointed sentences with ideas joined by dashes: Consider, she is sitting
down——which naturally presents a diﬂerent—which in short gives exactly
the idea—and the proportions must be preserved, you know; The naiveté
ofMiss Smith ’5 manners—and altogether—Oh, it is most admirable!
This captures very successfully his breathless gush and exaggerated
enthusiasm. He also has a formal vocabulary which he uses when he
wishes to appear gallant — entreated for the permission has already been
noted, but the free indirect of Might he be trusted with the commission,
what inﬁnite pleasure should he have in executing it  it was impossible
to say how much he should be gratiﬁed by being employed on such an
errand. If you have a look at his later proposal to Emma in the carriage,
it is characterised in just the same register.

His comments to Mr Woodhouse are exaggeratedly obsequious:
You, sir, may say anything, and he ﬂows on effusiver but I must confess
that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing ofMiss Smith
out ofdoors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit! The
later moment where Emma has to face his pompous proposal and
the realisation of her misunderstanding is one of the jewels of this
wonderful novel!

The narrative is focused on Emma herself and any criticism of her
is suggested in the novelist’s irony. There was no want of likeness is not
exactly a ringing endorsement of the picture, but she is always very
sure of herself: she had great conﬁdence ofits being in every way a pretty
drawing. The words ‘great’ and ‘in every way’ suggest the novelist’s
ironic eye. Although Emma enjoys being praised, she is at least aware
of some of her own faults, though she doesn’t enjoy others commenting
on them. She knows Mr Elton lacks judgement in his appraisal of the
picture but she’s enjoying it: She could not respect his eye, but his love

179Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

 

“Wme “Kg Situation Hie references to love’ (above) and a lover 1n the passage are
TIP g all ambiguous For example, any thing less would certaznly have been
In order to relate this fU rther too little in a lover in Emma’s mind means the lover of Harriet, but we
to the re“ Of the nove‘ are beginning to suspect that she is the object of his affections. In the

in answering a passage

Stion yo would need paragraph dealing with Mrs Weston’s response, we see not in the least
que , u

l
i
 to give further examples of a suspecting that she was addressing a lover, and again we are aware of
 Characteristic behaviour  the ambiguity of the word, which runs ironically through the passage,

 and further evidence of the i drawing attention to the ambiguity.

 narrathe irony created by 3 One of the key features of Austen’s style is balance: she constantly a;
 APSth t? enhanc? thé theme g uses balanced sentences, and these can give an effect of order and logic.
 0 Emma S educat'on Into ' Ihey may be antithetical: She could not respect his eye, but his love

 i

i t:

self—awareness and greater ’ ’ . ,
and hzs complazsance were unexceptzonable, or they may incorporate

Rinmmty. ‘5, antithesis leading to a climax: a standing memorial of the beauty of one,
" WWMWWMWWMWWW the skill of the other, and the friendship of both. However, because these
examples both relate to Emmas conﬁdence that she is always right they
are being used ironically. Emma will create disorder before balance is
a restored at the end of the novel.

Who can be in doubt ofwhatfollowed? When any two young
people take it into their heads to marry, they are pretty sure by
perseverance to carry their point, be they ever so poor, or ever
so imprudent, or ever so little likely to be necessary to each
other’s ultimate comfort.

Jane Austen Persuasion (1816)

m ‘wsw r<axcu'1a?»$43"wm’e:mistyunwwmxvtznmvzmauwzc»imvx'sbph

 REMINDER
E A tricolon is a series ofthree

 words, phrases or clauses
 arranged for rhetorical effect.



I have chosen this quotation because it also illustrates the use of
tricolon well (ever so ...). I think too that the use of the alliteration of
the ‘p’ sound:pretty  perseverance  point  poor  (im)prudent
build up to and emphasises the tricolon effectively.

‘ <6
“Alesxa‘nzumsaxm‘—5memmw‘

3"
- r a wart»; «:04, car‘u‘muvia-m/ry’L/‘mwwmmmwwwwmlw

.,Essay title: Write a critical appreciation of the
following passage, relating its style and concerns to
the novel as a whole,

Two hours ago, as Tom was walking to St Ogg’s,

he saw the distant future before him, as he might
have seen a tempting stretch of smooth sandy beach
beyond a belt of ﬂinty shingles: he was on the grassy
bank then, and thought the shingles might soon be
passed. But now his feet were on the sharp stones:
the belt of shingles had widened, and the stretch of
sand had dwindled into narrowness. ‘What did my
Uncle Deane say, Tom?’ said Maggie, putting her
arm through Tom’s as he was warming himself rather
drearily by the kitchen ﬁre. ‘Did he say he would give
you a situation?’

‘No, he didn’t say that. He didn’t quite promise me
anything: he seemed to thinkI couldn’t have a very
good situation. I’m too young.’

‘But didn’t he speak kindly, Tom?’

‘Kindly? Pooh! what’s the use of talking about that?
Iwouldn’t care about his speaking kindly, if I could get
a situation. But it’s such a nuisance and bother — I’ve
been at school all this while learning Latin and things,
— not a bit of good to me, — and now my uncle says, I
must set about learning book—keeping and calculation,
and those things. He seems to make out I’m good for
nothing.’

Tom’s mouth twitched with a bitter expression as
he looked at the ﬁre.

‘0 what a pity we haven’t got Dominie Sampson!’
said Maggie, who couldn’t help mingling some gayety
with their sadness. ‘If he had taught me book—keeping
by double entry and after the Italian method, as he did
Lucy Bertram, I could teach you, Tom.’

‘Yoa teach! Yes, I daresay. That’s always the tone
you take,’ said Tom.

‘Dear Tom, I was only joking,’ said Maggie, putting
her cheek against his coat sleeve.

‘But it’s always the same, Maggie,’ said T om, with
the little frown he put on when he was about to be
justiﬁably severe. ‘You’re always setting yourself up
above me and every one else. And I’ve wanted to
tell you about it several times. You ought not to have
spoken as you did to my uncles and aunts — you should
leave it to me to take care of my mother and you, and
not put yourself forward. You think you know better
than any one, but you’re almost always wrong. I can
judge much better than you can.’

Unit 22: Prose passage questions

Poor Tom! he had just come from being lectured
and made to feel his inferiority: the reaction of
his strong, self—asserting nature must take place
somehow; and here was a case in which he could
justly show himself dominant. Maggie’s cheek ﬂushed
and her lip quivered with conﬂicting resentment and
affection, and a certain awe as well as admiration of
Tom’s ﬁrmer and more effective character. She did
not answer immediately; very angry words rose to her
lips, but they were driven back again, and she said at
last,

‘You often think I’m conceited, Tom, when I don’t
mean what I say at all in that way. I don’t mean to put
myself above you — I know you behaved better than
I did yesterday. But you are always so harsh to me,
Torn.’

With the last words the resentment was rising
again.

‘No, I’m not harsh,’ said Tom, with severe decision.
‘I’m always kind to you, and so I shall be; I shall always
take care of you. But you must mind what I say.’

Their mother came in now, and Maggie rushed
away, that her burst of tears, which she felt must come,
might not happen till she was safe upstairs. They were
very bitter tears: everybody in the world seemed so
hard and unkind to Maggie: there was no indulgence,
no fondness, such as she imagined when she fashioned
the world afresh in her own thoughts. In books there
were people who were always agreeable or tender,
and delighted to do things that made one happy, and
who did not show their kindness by ﬁnding fault. The
world outside the books was not a happy one, Maggie
felt; it seemed to be a world Where people behaved
the best to those they did not pretend to love and that
did not belong to them. And if life had no love in it,
what else was there for Maggie? Nothing but poverty
and the companionship of her mother’s narrow
griefs — perhaps of her father’s heart-cutting childish
dependence. There is no hopelessness so sad as that
of early youth, when the soul is made up of wants,
and has no long memories, no super-added life in the
life of others; though we who look on think lightly of
such premature despair, as if our Vision of the future
lightened the blind sufferer’s present.

George Eliot The Mill on the Floss (1860)

181Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

$wmrma TIP _ . E 5 Situation
 ngfirg::r’tgohnesl|:$2222?  E What is the situation here? This is a passage of dialogue between the
 your bearings. you do not g 8 brother and sister, with a paragraph at the beginning by the narrator ;
 need to write this in any final g giving some sense of Tom’s feelings and one in the middle referring to 
L essay!  both, and one at the end referring to Maggie. "lhere are also a number of 
. _WﬂmmmmWWWWWWWMt descriptive additions to the dialogue itself. 

Begin by looking at the characterisation

I Leaving the three longer paragraphs for the moment, ﬁnd phrases
within the dialogue which show Maggie’s attitude to her brother 1
(for example, putting her arm through Tom’s; mingling some gayety 
with their sadness; putting her cheek against his coat sleeve; a certain I
awe as well as admiration). Now ﬁnd phrases which describe Tom’s
attitude towards the situation and his sister (for example, warming
himselfrather drearily; a bitter expression; with the littlefrown he
put on ...; with severe decision). What do these suggest about the
dynamic between the two?

 

I Look at the dialogue itself. Does it conﬁrm your View of the two
characters? Tom — dominant, critical, self—righteous; Maggie —
affectionate, self-critical, emotional, having a sense of unfairness.
Find detailed examples of these. When Maggie refers to Dominie
Sampson and Lucy Bertram, these are characters in a novel by Sir

5 Walter Scott. What does this tell us about Maggie? Is there further
evidence to support your point elsewhere in the passage? Why does
Tom say You’re always settingyourselfup above me and every one
else? Why does Tom react in this way to her suggestion?

I Now consider the narrator’s longer paragraphs. What effect does the

View of Tom’s behaviour? What about the paragraph beginning Poor
Tom? How do you respond to strong, self—asserting nature and a case

and what makes it strong and effective? Do you agree with this?
Justify your point of View.

I Look now at the ﬁnal paragraph about Maggie. In what ways does
the narrator create sympathy for her and her situation?

The novelist’s concerns

Now that you’ve looked at the charactersation, what do you think are
the novelist’s concerns here? (Another way of considering this might be
to ask yourself ‘What themes can you see in the passage?’)

I The contrast between Tom and Maggie but also their affection,
which for Maggie is manifested in physical affection and desire to
help and sympathise, and in Tom by promising to look after her
though it may seem more like duty and a desire to be in control. Her
intellectual superiority is a source of great frustration for him.

I Maggie’s love of reading and Tom’s rejection of it remind us of the
theme of education in the novel. Tom did not enjoy the scholarlyUnit 22: Prose passage questions

 

education he received and would have preferred something
practical.

The inequality between boy and girl: Maggie is cleverer and more

scholarly than Tom, but because she is a girl she will not be educated
or allowed to work.

The harshness of life, its challenges for the young of both sexes; Tom
has to face the fact that he is unsuitable for the hard world of work
which faces him and Maggie is conﬁned to the companionship of her

mother’s narrow griefs despite being so intelligent and affectionate
and full of potential.

The narrator’s position

What is the narrator’s position? The ﬁnal paragraph contains
a general statement at the end, which is typical of the intrusive

narrator, giving her views on life. Here she shows great sympathy for
the young and the difﬁculties they encounter.

Is the narrator even-handed in her handling of the two characters?
She certainly tries to be fair to Tom’s situation, which is a hard one.
But look at the middle paragraph of narrative:

Poor Tom! he hadjust comefrom being lectured and made tofeel his

inferiority; the reaction of his strong, self-asserting nature must take
place somehow; and here was a case in which he couldjustly show
himselfdominant.

ls this the novelist’s View, or Tom’s own? Iustly perhaps suggests this
is his own view, here somewhat ironic.

The ﬁnal paragraph is closely linked to Maggie’s point of View: ‘

The world outside the books was not a happy one, Maggiefelt; it seemed
to be a world where people behaved the best to those they did not

pretend to love, and that did not belong to them. And iflife had no love
in it, what else was therefor Maggie?

It starts with her comparison of the world of books — that ideal place
where people behave well and love each other — with the harsh real
world; Maggie felt indicates her point of View. But the rhetorical
question moves to a more dispassionate viewpoint which leads

into the narrator’s ﬁnal general insight into the difﬁculties of being

young.

Relating the passage to the novel as a whole

Remember that you have two options here:

1

You could write a few further paragraphs relating your points to

what you see in the novel as a whole: the handling of the relationship
between brother and sister; gender inequalities; the theme of
education; the narrator’s use of description and dialogue; her narrative
point of view and apparent sympathies. You could show that the
dilferences in the siblings’ characters and Maggie’s desire for affection
will lead inexorably to a tragic outcome, which you can discuss.

183Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

  2 You could, on the other hand, relate the points to the novel as a

3 WRITING TIP whole as you go, so that, for example, at the end of your paragraph 

Either methOd 0f apprOaCh on education you could add some comment on Tom’s days at school 

can work well’ but Whichgver and the relationship with Philip Wakem; Maggie’s frustrations as a

you choose, you must wrlte . . , . . .

a Close critical analysis of the girl in a man 5 world; and the difference between academic learning

printed passage and practical life experience which runs through the novel. When
discussing the narrative style you could give other examples of the
novelist’s intrusions.



atmtWmaWiswwmmmmrmmwm.me’

The critic A. S. Byatt claims that the novelist saw the relationship
between Tom and Maggie as more central to the novel than it was. This
may or may not be true of the novel as a whole, but the passage here
would be an argument against this point ofview.

 

84

 

Stratford Mill by John Constable.

ACTIVITY 22.3

Write a critical appreciation of the following passage from the story Her First
Ball by Katherine Mansﬁeld, relating its concerns and methods to two other
stories by Mansﬁeld in your selection.

Note: For those who are not studying Mansﬁeld’s stories, Leila is a country
girl who is coming to a ball for the ﬁrst time, with her more experienced

cousins. She feels shy and a little out of place as her cousins are so used to this
sort of thing.l
r

‘Floor’s not bad,’ said the new voice. Did one always
begin with the ﬂoor? And then, ‘Were you at the
Neaves’ on Tuesday?’ And again Leila explained.
Perhaps it was a little strange that her partners were
not more interested. For it was thrilling. Her ﬁrst
ball! She was only at the beginning of everything.

It seemed to her that she had never known what the
night was like before. Up till now it had been dark,
silent, beautiful very often—oh yes—but mournful
somehow. Solemn. And now it would never be like
that again—it had opened dazzling bright.

‘Care for an ice?’ said her partner. And they went
through the swing doors, down the passage, to the
supper-room. Her cheeks burned, she was fearfully
thirsty. How sweet the ices looked on little glass plates
and how cold the frosted spoon was, iced too! And
when they came back to the hall there was the fat man
waiting for her by the door. It gave her quite a shock
again to see how old he was; he ought to have been
on the stage with the fathers and mothers. And when
Leila compared him with her other partners he looked
shabby. His waistcoat was creased, there was a button
off his glove, his coat looked as if it was dusty with
French chalk.

‘Come along, little lady,’ said the fat man. He
scarcely troubled to clasp her, and they moved away so
gently, it was more like walking than dancing. But he
said not a word about the ﬂoor. ‘Your ﬁrst dance, isn’t
it?’ he murmured. §

‘How did you know?’

‘Ah,’ said the fat man, <that’s what it is to be old!’
He wheezed faintly as he steered her past an awkward
couple. ‘You see, I’ve been doing this kind of thing for
the last thirty years.’

Situation

COMMENT

TIP

Remember, considering the
situation is to help you get
your bearings. You do not
need to write this in any final
essay!

Unit 22: Prose passage questions

 

"Ihirty years?’ cried Leila. Twelve years before she
was born!

‘It hardly bears thinking about, does it?’ said the
fat man gloomily. Leila looked at his bald head, and
she felt quite sorry for him.

‘I think it’s marvellous to be still going on,’ she said
kindly.

‘Kind little lady,’ said the fat man, and he pressed
her a little closer, and hummed a bar of the waltz. ‘Of
course,’ he said, ‘you can’t hope to last anything like as
long as that. No—o,’ said the fat man, ‘long before that
you’ll be sitting up there on the stage, looking on, in
your nice black velvet. And these pretty arms will have
turned into little short fat ones, and you’ll beat time
with such a different kind of fan—a black ebony one.’
The fat man seemed to shudder. ‘And you’ll smile away
like the poor old dears up there, and point to your
daughter, and tell the elderly lady neXt to you how
some dreadful man tried to kiss her at the club ball.
And your heart will ache, ache’—the fat man squeezed
her closer still, as if he really was sorry for that poor
heart—‘because no one wants to kiss you now. And
you’ll say how unpleasant these polished ﬂoors are to
walk on, how dangerous they are. Eh, Mademoiselle
Twinkletoes?’ said the fat man softly.

Leila gave a light little laugh, but she did not feel
like laughing. Was it—could it all be true? It sounded
terribly true. Was this ﬁrst ball only the beginning
of her last ball, after all? At that the music seemed
to change; it sounded sad, sad; it rose upon a great
sigh. Oh, how quickly things changed! Why didn’t
happiness last for ever? For ever wasn’t a bit too long.

Katherine Mansfield Her First Ball (1921)

What is the situation here? Leila is dancing in turn with the men who
have claimed a dance at the beginning of the evening by writing on
her programme. She is elated and overwhelmed by the intensity of the
experience, taking in all the sensory images around her. One of the
partners is afat man who, as they dance, punctures her happiness by
imagining her future as an older woman, no longer attractive or able to
dance. (The story ends with her recovering her spirits somewhat as she
again dances with a young man with curly hair.) Much of the passage is
their dialogue, interspersed with description.

185Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

M

An epiphany is a moment
ofsudden realisation or
illumination. These often happen

at the climax ofa short story or
novel.

Begin by looking at the characterisation

Starting with the fat man, how many times is this phrase used for him
in the passage, and what does it suggest? (I found eight.) How else is
he described (old, shabby, wheezed faintly, gloomily)? What is it that
makes him seem to shudder (the thought of her arms turning into short
fat ones, perhaps)? What is you response to he pressed her a little Closer
and he squeezed her closer still? Do you feel any sympathy for him?
Does the writer give him any symbolic function, do you think? (Your
consideration of the writer’s concerns may help you to answer this.) He
has a long passage of direct speech. Consider the use of repetition of
words in the passage, and the opening of sentences. What effect does
this have?

Clearly the story is focalised on Leila. She is excited and responsive
to everything around her. Find evidence from the language to support
this. You could consider:

I sensory description
I exclamations
I rhetorical questions

I repetition of sentence structure (look at the use of ‘And’ and ‘How’
at the beginning of sentences).

The novelist’s concerns

What are the novelist’s concerns here? Consider the following points,
see if you can add to them, and ﬁnd examples from the passage to
support them all:

I the intensity of sensory experience

I the contrast of youth and age

I the acquisition of experience

I the impermanence of happiness, youth, life itself

I women’s position in society as merely decorative objects.

The narrator’s position

What is the narrator’s position? The narrator’s focalised attention on
Leila and her use of free indirect speech suggest much greater sympathy
for her. Do you detect any criticism of Leila? Do you think the fat man,
so unsympathetically imagined, is a representative or even symbolic
ﬁgure? If so, what does he represent?

Mansﬁeld’s stories often end with an ‘epiphany’, a word also applied
to James Joyce’s work.

Relating the passage to the novel as a whole

First, you need to select two stories that relate closely to the issues here.
If this is an exam situation, think carefully about relevance before
plunging in. Remember that you have two options here as far as your
essay structure is concerned:

1 You could write a few further paragraphs relating your points to
what you see in two other stories: for example, the presentation ofUnit 22: Prose passage questions

 

the young and their View of the world; the contrast between this
View and that of their elders; moments of intense experience of
different kinds; the position of women in society; the narrator’s

use of description and dialogue; her point of View and apparent
sympathies. If you are studying Mansﬁeld’s stories, go through each
of the stories in your selection and decide how far they meet the
criteria.

2 You could relate the points to the other stories as you go, so that, l
for example, at the end of your paragraph on the contrast between
youth and age you could add some comment on The Garden—Party;
at the end of your paragraph on women’s restricted expectations,
you could incorporate your comment on The Daughters of the Late
Colonel. The stories are not of course exactly the same as each other
— it is Laura’s family, not a fat man, who provide a contrast to her
impulses in 7716 Garden—Party; and the daughters of the late colonel
are two middle-aged ladies who have never experienced much of life H
owing to their domineering father.

187

 

Leila at her first ball, from Her First Ball by Katherine Mansfield.