Unit 26: Drama Unseens

 

Unit 26: Drama Unseens

The following exercises may be done as complete Unseens or you can answer the

questions at the end of each one as a help towards close analysis. The ﬁrst is from 3
another Shakespeare play, King Lear (1606); the second from Richard B. Sheridan’s

play The Rivals (1775); the third from John Galsworthy’s play Strife (1909); the

fourth from Wole Soyinka’s Death and the King’s Horseman (1975); and the ﬁfth

a short revue sketch, Last to Go (1964), by Harold Pinter (which is complete).

The sixth is from Our Country’s Good (1988) by Timberlake Wertenbaker, and is

intended for class discussion. 1 7

Passage 1: from King LearAct 1 Scene 1 ‘

LEAR: Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the map there. Know, that we have divided
In three our kingdom; and ’tis our fast intent
To shake all cares and business from our age,
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we 5
Unburdened crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
And you, our no less loving son of Albany, 231
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy, 10
Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
And here are to be answered. Tell me, my daughters
(Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state), 15
Which of you shall we say doth love us most,
That we our largest bounty may extend
Where nature doth with merit challenge? Gonerill,
Our eldest—born, speak ﬁrst. ’
GONERILL: Sir, I love you more than word can Wield the matter, 20
Dearer than eye—sight, space, and liberty;
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
As much as child e’er loved, or father found;
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable; 25 {

 

Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
CORDELIA: [Aside] What shall Cordelia speak?
Love, and be silent.
LEAR: Of all these bounds, even from this line, to this,
With shadowy forests and with champains riched, 30
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
We make thee lady. To thine and Albany’s issues
Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall?Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

REGAN:

CORDELIA:

LEAR:

CORDELIA:

 

I am made of that self metal as my sister,

And prize me at her worth. In my true heart

I ﬁnd she names my very deed of love.

Only she comes too short, that I profess

Myself an enemy to all other joys

Which the most precious square ofsense possesses,
And ﬁnd I am alone felicitate

In your dear highness’ love.

[Aside] Then poor Cordelia,
And yet not so, since I am sure my love’s

More ponderous than my tongue.

T0 thee and thine hereditary ever

Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,

No less in space, validity, and pleasure

Than that conferred on Gonerill. Now our joy,
Although our last and least, to Whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy

Strive to be interessed; What can you say to draw

A third more'opulent than your sisters? Speak.
Nothing, my lord.

 

4O

45

50

Shakespeare King LearAct 1 Scene 1

Unseen alert! lfyou are doing this as an Unseen, do not read on.

King Lear and his three daughters.Unit 26: Drama Unseens

 

ACTIVITY 26.1 l

Read Passage 1 carefully and answer the questions.

King Lear has decided to divide his kingdom into three and give a share to

each of his three daughters. Here he asks them to say how much they love him

and he will reward them accordingly. Goneril is married to Albany, Regan to

Cornwall, and Cordelia has two suitors present: France and Burgundy. t

Dramatic action _

This division of the kingdom is a very formal scene, with many characters

in the court. Lear gives an explanation of his intentions then speaks to each

daughter in turn. Goneril and Regan answer him and are given (with their

husbands) an allotted share. Cordelia speaks three times in the extract, the

ﬁrst two of which are asides to the audience. Her ﬁnal line is Nothing. ‘

Characterisation, with emphasis on language and tone
King Lear
I Why does Lear use ‘we’ and ‘our’ when he is referring to himself? What
effect does this have?
I while we unburthened crawl towards death — what does this say about Lear
and his position as king? l
I What do you notice about lines 14 and 15, both their position in the

sentence and what they have to say? 233
I Look at the way Lear addresses his three daughters: Goneril, / Our eldest—

born;  our second daughter, / Our dearest Regan; and ourjoy, /Although
the last, not least. What is your response to this?
I Look closely at the language used by Lear when speaking to Goneril
in lines 29—34. In what tone is it spoken? Can you see any evidence of
formality in the way that he addresses her, the diction used and the
arrangement of his sentence? (Consider the use of ‘you’ and ‘thou’, for
example.)
I Lear describes Cordelia’s two suitors as the vines of France and the milk
of Burgundy. What ﬁgure of speech is this, and what does it suggest about
Lear’s attitude? l
I A third more opulent than your sisters — what is your reaction to this? 1
You could consider Lear’s attitudes as well as what reactions the three l
daughters might have.  I

Goneril

l
l
I Goneril’s speech is full of hyperbole (exaggeration for effect). Find some ‘ 7
examples of this and comment on what they suggest about Goneril. ’ l 

Regan
I Regan speaks of my very deed of love. What sort of context is the word
‘deed’ normally used in? What does this suggest about her attitude to love?

I What do the lines 35—42 mean? How do you respond to them?

I Comment on the use of the word felicitate (you may need to look it up). Is
this the usual word one would use?Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Cordelia

I What do Cordelia’s asides tell us about her attitude to her father and her
sisters? Are you surprised when she ﬁnally says: Nothing?

Proleptic irony

King Lear goes on to reject his most loyal and loving daughter because she
refuses to play the ‘love test’ game that her sisters have played. Lear is turned
out of doors by the two other daughters, whose hypocrisy here becomes very
clear as the play goes on.

ACTIVITY 26.2

Can you ﬁnd any examples of words or phrases which are used here but which
have irony in the context of the development of the play? If you know the play
you may ﬁnd this easier.

The following are some examples you may have found:

I darker purpose: Lear just means more serious business, but what
I he does has very dark and tragic consequences for himself and

COMMENT

everyone else.

I thatfuture strife /May beprevented now: he is in fact creating a
situation of strife, not preventing it. Dividing the kingdom was

a very foolish idea, which would be felt keenly by Shakespeare’s
m contemporaries.

Talk to a Classmate or in I Where nature doth with merit challenge: the word nature, which
class about how you would Lear is using to mean the natural love of a daughter to her father,
present this scene on Stage has many meanings in the play, not least the Vicious laws of human
and what themes and eﬂrects nature where people can be Violent and aggressive even to their

you would try to bring familY-

out. How might audiences I Dearer than eye-sight: one of the play’s most pervasive motifs is
react to the division of a blindness and one of the characters, Gloucester, is blinded by Regan
kingdom? and Cornwall, but at the beginning of that scene Goneril has said:

Pluck out his eyes. A little later in that scene, Kent, Lear’s loyal lord,
tells him not to be blind and is banished for his challenge to the

yield much insight.

   . . king
7 TIP xii I I am made / Ofthat selfrnetal as my sister is: Regan and Goneril do
  indeed turn out to be much the same in their approach to their old
Every ShakGSpeare scene ‘ father and both strive f r the lov ofEd ndl t 'n th 1
contains within it hints ofthe s ’ 0 e mu 3 6“ ep ay'
major concerns of the play in g I the mostprecious square ofsense: sense can mean physical senses or
question. Close analysis can i perception. Later in the play, Lear will lose his senses, partly caused
i

by his ungrateful daughters’ unfeeling behaviour towards him.Unit 26: Drama Unseens

 

Passage 2: from The Rivals by Richard B. Sheridan i
Note: Sir Anthony is lack Absolute’s father, and has arranged to marry him off to a

wealthy young lady. Jack is already in love, so the two quarrel Violently.
2
[Enter SIR ANTHONY ABSOLUTE]

SIR ANTHONY:

ABSOLUTE:

SIR ANTHONY:

Odd sol—I mustn’t forget her though—Yes, Jack, the
independence I was talking of is by marriage—the
fortune is saddled with a Wife—but I suppose that makes
no difference.

Sir! sirl—you amaze me!

Why, what the devil’s the matter with the fool? Just now
you were all gratitude and duty.

ABSOLUTE: Sir, I am delighted to see you here; looking so well! Your
sudden arrival at Bath made me apprehensive for your
health.

SIR ANTHONY: Very apprehensive, I dare say, jack—What, you are
recruiting here, hey?

ABSOLUTE: Yes, sir, I am on duty.

SIR ANTHONY: Well, Jack, I am glad to see you, though I did not expect
it, for I was going to write to you on a little matter of
business—Jack, I have been considering that I grow old
and inﬁrm, and shall probably not trouble you long.

ABSOLUTE: Pardon me, sir, I never saw you look more strong and
hearty; and I pray frequently that you may continue so.

SIR ANTHONY: I hope your prayers may be heard, with all my heart.
Well, then, Jack, I have been considering that I am so
strong and hearty I may continue to plague you a long
time. Now, Jack, I am sensible that the income of your 235
commission, and what I have hitherto allowed you, is
but a small pittance for a lad of your spirit.

‘ ABSOLUTE: Sir, you are very good.

SIR ANTHONY: And it is my wish, while yet I live, to have my boy make
some ﬁgure in the world. I have resolved, therefore, to
ﬁx you at once in a noble independence.

ABSOLUTE: Sir, your kindness overpowers me—such generosity
makes the gratitude of reason more lively than the
sensations even of ﬁlial affection.

SIR ANTHONY: I am glad you are so sensible of my attention—and you
shall be master of a large estate in a few weeks.

ABSOLUTE: Let my future life, sir, speak my gratitude; I cannot
express the sense I have of your muniﬁcence.—Yet, sir,

I presume you would not wish me to quit the army?

SIR ANTHONY: Oh, that shall be as your wife chooses.

ABSOLUTE: My wife, sir!

SIR ANTHONY: Ay, ay, settle that between you—settle that between you.

ABSOLUTE: A Wife, sir, did you say?

SIR ANTHONY: Ay, a wife—why, did not I mention her before?

ABSOLUTE: Not a word of her, sir.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

ABSOLUTE: Iwas, sir,—y0u talked to me of independence and a
fortune, but not a word of a Wife.

SIR ANTHONY: Why—what difference does that make? Odds life, sir! if
you have the estate, you must take it With the live stock
on it, as it stands.

Ifmy happiness is to be the price, Imust beg leave to
decline the purchase—Pray, sir, Who is the lady?

SIR ANTHONY: What’s that to you, sir?—Come, give me your promise to

love, and to marry her directly.

ABSOLUTE:

Unseen alert! lfyou are doing this as an Unseen, do not read on.

Richard B. Sheridan The Rivals (1775)

ACTIVITY 26.4

Read Passage 2 carefully and answer the questions.

Characterisation

Jack

I Comment on Jack’s use of sir to his father. What impression does this give?
I How would you describe the tone of Jack’s ﬁrst few speeches to his father?

I I pray frequently that you may continue 50: what might be an audience’s
I reaction to this line? What ﬁgure of speech is this?
I such generosity makes the gratitude of reason more lively than the
sensations even of ﬁlial aﬁection. Comment on Jack’s diction here. What
effect does this have? How might an audience respond to his tone?

Sir Anthony

I Jack, I have been considering that Igrow old and inﬁrm, and shallprobably
not trouble you long 
Well, then, Jack, I have been considering that I am so strong and hearty I
may continue to plague you a long time.
What do these two sentences tell us about Sir Anthony? What effect do
they have on the audience?

I DO you believe Sir Anthony’s claims to want to give Jack more of an
allowance and a large estate? Why not? In what tone would the actor speak
these lines?

I Sir Anthony starts to call Iack sir towards the end of the passage. How
does his tone diifer from the way in which lack uses sir earlier?

Structure

I Which line is the turning point in the scene? How does Jack’s short reply
emphasise the point?

I What is the effect of the repetition of the word wife?

I To whom is Why, what the devil’s the matter with the fool? addressed?
What effect does this have?

I What effect does the juxtaposition of lengthy complex sentences with
short phrases have here?Unit 26: Drama Unseens

 

TIP

Context: stock figures are
familiar types. We see them
in jokes, clichés and comedy,
here the severe father who
refuses to allow a child (often
a daughter, but here a son) to
marry the man/woman she/
he pleases. (We are reminded
of Egeus inA Midsummer
Night’s Dream.) Other stock
figures include the wife who
wears the trousers, the hen—
pecked husband, the dimwit,
the servant who is very quick
and clever who helps his
master, and so on. Characters
such as this in comedy will
produce a stock response too
— audiences know that this

is a character or situation to
laugh at.

 

Themes

I What can we deduce about Sir Anthony’s attitude towards marriage from
what he says? Find two illustrations to support your View.

I Although today’s audiences pride themselves on being egalitarian, the
idea of a wife as livestock always gets a big laugh in the theatre. (See Stock
ﬁgures and responses in the Tip box.)

I How do you respond to the following exchange? Pray, sir, who is the lady?
What’s that to you, sir?

As with many comedies, love, marriage and money are major issues. Sir
Anthony is arranging Jack’s marriage, but we are sure that, being a comedy,
the young people will have their own way eventually after various obstacles
are overcome. (Arranged marriages can of course be a serious subject,
especially in prose works.)

TIP

Writing about comic scenes is not easy. You need to be very alert to the sharpness
of the dialogue and the tone of voice in which it is spoken, as well as any

implications for stage business, gesture and movement. There is a kind of tennis
match effect here where the ball is lobbed across the net from side to side in a
quick, even pattern of witty exchange which is very enjoyable for the audience.

 

Passage 3: from Strife by John Galsworthy

Note: Anthony is Chairman of the Board, Edgar is his son, Wilder, Scantlebury,
Wanklin, Tench and Underwood are members of the Board. Harness is the Union
representative. The Board of the Company have been meeting to discuss the strike
of the men that has been going on for some time.

FROST:

UNDERWOOD:

HARNESS:

WILDERZ

[To ANTHONY] Mr Harness from the Union, waiting,
sir. The men are here too, sir.

[ANTHONY nods. UNDERWOOD goes to the door,
returning with HARNESS, apale, clean—shaven man
with hollow cheeks, quick eyes, and lantern jaw—
FROST has retired.]

[Pointing to TENCH’S chair] Sit there next the
Chairman, Harness, won’t you?

[At HARNEss’s appearance, the Board have drawn
together, as it were, and turned a little to him, like cattle
at a dog]

[With a sharp look round, and a how] Thanks! [He
sits—his accent is slightly nasal] Well, gentlemen, we’re
going to do business at last, I hope.

Depends on What you call business, Harness. Why
don’t you make the men come in?

237HARNESS:

ANTHONY:

HARNESS:

ANTHONY:
HARNESS:

ANTHONY:
HARNESS:

ANTHONY:

HARNESS:

ANTHONY:
HARNESS:
SCANTLEBURY

HARNESS:

WILDER:

HARNESS:

WANKLIN:

Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

[Sardonically] The men are far more in the right than
you are. ’lhe question with us is whether we shan’t
begin to support them again.

[He ignores them all, except ANTHONY, to whom he
turns in speaking]

Support them if you like; we’ll put in free labour and
have done with it.

That won’t do, Mr Anthony. You can’t get free labour,
and you know it.

We shall see that.

I’m quite frank with you. We were forced to withhold
our support from your men because some of their
demands are in excess of current rates. I expect to
make them withdraw those demands to—day: if they
do, take it straight from me, gentlemen, we shall back
them again at once. Now, Iwant to see something ﬁxed
upon before I go back to-night. Can’t we have done
with this old-fashioned tug-of-war business? What
good’s it doing you? Why don’t you recognise once for
all that these people are men like yourselves, and want
what’s good for them just as you want what’s good for
you [Bitterly] Your motor—cars, and champagne, and
eight—course dinners.

If the men will come in, we’ll do something for them.
[Ironically] Is that your opinion too, sir—and yours—
and yours? [The Directors do not answer] Well, all I can
say is: It’s a kind of high and mighty aristocratic tone I
thought we’d grown out of—seems I was mistaken.
It’s the tone the men use. Remains to be seen which
can hold out longest—they without us, or we without
them.

As business men, I wonder you’re not ashamed of this
waste of force, gentlemen. You know what it’ll all end
in.

What?

Compromise—it always does.

Can’t you persuade the men that their interests are the
same as ours?

[Turning ironically] I could persuade them of that, sir,
if they were.

Come, Harness, you’re a clever man, you don’t believe
all the Socialistic claptrap that’s talked nowadays.
There’s no real difference between their interests and
ours.

There’s just one very simple little question I’d like to
put to you. Will you pay your men one penny more
than they force you to pay them?

[WILDER is silent]

[Chiming in] I humbly thought that not to pay more
than was necessary was the A B C of commerce.

\wUnit 26: Drama Unseens

 

HARNESS: :With irony] Yes, that seems to be the A B C of ’
commerce, sir; and the A B C of commerce is between
your interests and the men’s.

SCANTLEBURY: :Whispering] We ought to arrange something.
HARNESS: :Drz'ly] Am I to understand then, gentlemen, that your
Board is going to make no concessions?

:WANKLIN and WILDER bendforward as z'fto speak,
but stop]

ANTHONY: :Noddz'ng] None.

:WANKLIN and WILDER again bend forward, and
SCANTLEBURY gives an unexpected grant]

 

 

 

HARNESS: You were about to say something, I believe?
But SCANTLEBURY says nothing] l7
EDGAR: :Looking up suddenly] We’re sorry for the state of the L
men. '
HARNESS: :Icz’ly] The men have no use for your pity, sir. What they

want is justice.
Unseen alert! Ifyou are doing this as an Unseen, do not read on.

John Galsworthy Strife (1909)

ACTIVITY 26.5

Read Passage 3 carefully and answer the questions.

239

‘What do you notice about the playwright’s stage directions? Find some
examples of direction involving the actors’ appearance, words or movements
and think about their effect.

Characterisation
Who are the dominant characters in the scene?

Anthony
In what tone does Anthony speak throughout the scene? Find some examples
which reveal his authority. I

Harness

Harness has the longest speeches here. Consider his repetition of the word

gentlemen — what effect does this have? Find examples of his use of rhetorical

question, antitheses, ﬁrst person prefaces to remarks. How does he use speech

to dominate? Do you have sympathy for his viewpoint? Is he presented

sympathetically? Is he any more than a mouthpiece for socialist views? Does l
he represent the workers? Support your views with textual reference.

The Board

Look closely at the second half of the passage. Find examples to show how
the Board members are reacting to what is going on (you may ﬁnd the stage
directions helpful here). Are they differentiated from each other?

Edgar
Edgar has only one line. In what ways is it important?Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Structure
In what ways and how effectively does this extract move towards a climax?

Themes
This is clearly a drama of issues. The characters here are antagonists and there
is not much differentiation of their speech. (If you read the play, you will ﬁnd
the working men don’t speak very differently either: they just say ye instead of
you and drop the ‘g’ from -z'ng words.) The dispute between masters and men
is the writer’s main concern, which is expressed in the conﬂict of powerful
personalities.
A concern with how far the Union represent the ordinary workers is also
suggested here. Young and old values are contrasted, with Edgar representing
a softer, more sympathetic line than his father. Characters have representative
functions.
There are other playwrights who use almost novelistic detail in stage
W directions (George Bernard Shaw, for example, or Eugene O’Neill). See if you
The foqrth wall is the invisible can ﬁnd some examples and consider their effectiveness.
wall, which we imagineacross.
the proscenium arch‘ofa

conventional theatre through
which an audience watches the

play. it is a usually a naturalistic TIP

convention, as the actors carry Although this is a play with obvious political concerns, there is no evidence of any
on as ifthe audience is not there ‘distancing’ effect. It strives to show the characters as like ‘real’ people, some of
andrwe are able to look in on whom are more sympathetic than others. The audience here form the fourth wait

something private. , to the scene.

 

Passage 4: from Death and the King’s Horseman by Wole Soyinka
Note: Pilkings is the District Ofﬁcer in a Yoruba city in Nigeria in 1946, when
Nigeria is under British colonial rule. Here, he and his wife Jane are about to go to
a ball dressed in what they think of as fancy dress, involving ceremonial masks, the
appearance of which has earlier upset the native police sergeant Amusa.

4a

PILKINGS: Jane!

JANE: [ﬁom the bedroom] Coming darling. Nearly ready.
PILKINGS: Never mind being ready, just listen to this.

JANE: What is it?

PILKINGS: Amusa’s report. Listen. ‘I have to report that it come to my

information that one prominent chief, namely the Elesin
Oba, is to commit death tonight as a result of native custom.
Because this is criminal offence I await further instruction at
charge ofﬁce. Sergeant Amusa.
[JANE comes out on to the verandah while he is reading]
JANE: Did I hear you say commit death?
PILKINGS: Obviously he means murder.JANE:

PILKINGSZ

JANE:

PILKINGSZ

JANE:

PILKINGS:

JANE:

PILKINGS:

JANE:

PILKINGSZ

JANE:

PILKINGS:

JOSEPH:

PILKINGSI

JANE:

PILKINGS:

JANE:

PILKINGSZ

Unit 26: Drama Unseens

You mean a ritual murder?

Must be. You think you’ve stamped it all out but it’s always
lurking under the surface somewhere.

Oh. Does it mean we’re not getting to the ball at all?

No—o. I’ll have the man arrested. Everyone remotely
involved. In any case there may be nothing to it. Just
rumours.

Really? I thought you found Amusa’s rumours generally
reliable.

That’s true enough. But who knows what may have been
giving him the scare lately. Look at his conduct tonight.
[laughing] You have to admit he had his own peculiar
logic. [Deepens her voice in imitation] How can man talk
against death to person in uniform of death? [Laughs]
Anyway, you can’t go into the police station dressed like
that.

I’ll send Joseph with instructions. Damn it what a
confounded nuisance!

But don’t you think you should talk ﬁrst to the man,
Simon?

Do you want to go to the ball or not?

Darling, why are you getting rattled? I was only trying to be
intelligent. It seems hardly fair just to lock up a man — and
a chief at that — simply on the er  what is that legal word
again? — uncorroborated word of a sergeant.

Well, that’s easily decided. Joseph!

[from within] Yes master.

You’re quite right of course. I am getting rattled. Probably
the effect of those bloody drums. Do you hear how they go
on and on?

I wondered when you’d notice. Do you suppose it has
something to do with this affair?

Who knows? They always ﬁnd an excuse for making a
noise  [Thoughtfully] Even so 

Yes Simon?

It’s different Jane. I don’t think I’ve heard this particular —
sound — before. Something unsettling about it.

Wole Soyinka Death and the King’s Horseman (1975)

"lhis extract from the play is largely a conversation between Pilkings, the District
Oﬂicer, an administrator and his wife. We do gain insight into their relationship,
but more prominent is the impression created of their, especially his, attitude to the
native Yoruba people who are in ‘his’ area.

241Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

Read Passage 4a carefully and answer the questions.

Characterisation
Pilkings

people, for example.)
I What is his immediate response to anything that looks like ‘trouble’?
I Can you discern anything of his attitude towards his wife from the dialogue?

I Does he strike you as a conﬁdent administrator of his area? What evidence
could you offer in support of your point of View?

I In what way does the writer suggest through language that Pilkings is
rattled by what is going on?

Jane
I How does Jane regard the native people? How do you know?

I Is she exactly like her husband? Look closely at what she says. How does
Soyinka create a distinctive character here through her language?

Amusa and Joseph
I Neither character is in this sequence. However, we gain a strong sense of J
Amusa’s personality from his report, which Pilkings reads out. In what
I way does the playwright adapt his language to suggest that English is a
second language for him?

I What function is Joseph going to be asked to do? What does his one line
from outside the stage area suggest about him?

Structure of the extract

I Obviously this is an extract from a longer scene, but it nonetheless has a
shape. Where does it start and how does it develop?

I How does Soyinka build suspense?

Dramatic action

it
t
g
Aplay may use different g
kmds of language and ? characters, and helps to create a tense atmosphere.
scene to represent different 
ideas and to offer striking §
antithesis. The play ‘Savages’ g

i

i

by Christopher Hampton,

a» W. mmwe‘ names» rwxmw<muw~

for example, intersperses sequence. It is a hierarchical society, with the colonial administrators (men), their

 dialogue beiween 5' diplomat  wives — deﬁnitely lower down the pecking order — and then the native policemen
 add a Braz'l'an revélfﬂ'onéry i and the servants, who all clearly know their place. There are village and tribal
I With scenes Of Brazman tribes g e0 les not re rese ted in this e tr t but th I 1 th t l
and their rituals Where no g p p p n X ac, epaygves emV01ce1n an en Hey
l

word is spoken.

awewwm», 

,-- wv-prM-p :wsrn»~w~:ma.a 5mg»!iwrrurmawxnv'wwwm  n v

‘ AUnit 26: Drama Unseens

 

Here is another extract from the last scene of the play: {

Note: Pilkings’s perhaps well-meaning but very ignorant interventions in tribal
tradition have created a tragic situation, articulated by an unnamed Praise-Singer,
one of the key tribal representatives who is central to the oral rituals of the tribe.
Soyinka has said that matters of birth, death and the transitions between them are
more important than ‘a clash of cultures’.

4b

PRAISE-SINGER: Elesin, we placed the reins of the world in your hands
yet you watched it plunge over the edge of the bitter
precipice. You sat with folded arms while evil strangers
tilted the world from its course and crashed it beyond
the edge of emptiness — you muttered, there is little
that one man can do, you left us ﬂoundering in a blind
future. Your heir has taken the burden on himself.
What the end will be, we are not gods to tell. But this
young shoot has poured its sap into the parent stalk,
and we know this is not the way of life. Our world is
tumbling in the void of strangers, Elesin.

Tlp In what ways does the language of the Praise—Singer differ from the dialogue
post_co[onia[ literature is between the Pilkings? Try to ﬁnd examples of the following: 243

usually concerned wrth I metaphor

I reference to religious and metaphysical concerns

national identity and indeed,

the clash of cultures. But it .
may also be an exploration of I the effect of addressing a character, Elesin, the king’s horseman, in the second

philosophical ideas, as here. person.

 

Passage 5: Last To Go by Harold Pinter (an early revue sketch)

5
A coffee stall. A BARMAN and an old NEWSPAPER SELLER. The BARMAN
leans on his counter, the OLD MAN stands with tea. |

Silence.

MAN: You was a bit busier earlier.
BARMAN: Ah.

MAN: Round about ten.
BARMAN: Ten, was it?

MAN: About then. ‘
Pause.
I passed by here about then.

BARMAN: Oh yes?

MAN: I noticed you were doing a bit of trade.
Pause.
BARMAN: Yes, trade was very brisk here about ten.
MAN: Yes, I noticed. 7

Pause.Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

I sold my last one about then. Yes. About nine forty—ﬁve.
BARMAN: Sold your last then, did you?

MAN: Yes, my last ‘Evening News’ it was. Went about twenty to ten.
Pause

BARMAN: ‘Evening News’, was it?

MAN: Yes.
Pause.

Sometimes it’s the ‘Star’ is the last to go.
BARMAN: Ah.

MAN: Or the  whatsisname.
BARMAN: ‘Standard’.
MAN: Yes.
Pause.
All I had left tonight was the ‘Evening News’.
Pause.
BARMAN: Then that went, did it?
MAN: Yes.
Pause.
Like a shot.
Pause.
BARMAN: You didn’t have any left, eh?
MAN: No. Not after I sold that one.
Pause.

BARMAN: It was after that you must have come by here then, was it?
MAN: Yes, I come by here after that, see, after I packed up.
BARMAN: You didn’t stop here though, did you?

MAN: When?

BARMAN: Imean, you didn’t stop here and have a cup of tea then,
did you?

MAN: What, about ten?

BARMAN: Yes.

MAN: No, I went up to Victoria.

BARMAN: No, I thought I didn’t see you.

MAN: I had to go up to Victoria.
Pause.

BARMAN: Yes, trade was very brisk here about then.
Pause.

MAN: Iwent to see if I could get hold of George.

BARMAN: Who?

MAN: George.
Pause.

BARMAN: George who?

MAN: George  whatsisname.

BARMAN: Oh.
Pause.
Did you get hold of him?

MAN: No. N o, I couldn’t get hold of him. I couldn’t locate him.

BARMAN: He’s not about much now, is he?

V Pause.
MAN: When did you last see him then?

ALUnit 26: Drama Unseens

 

BARMAN: Oh, I haven’t seen him for ears.
Y

MAN: No, nor me.
Pause.
BARMAN: Used to suffer very bad from arthritis.
MAN: Arthritis?
BARMAN: Yes.
MAN: He never suffered from arthritis.
BARMAN: Suffered very bad.
Pause.
MAN: Not when I knew him.
Pause.
BARMAN: I think he must have left the area.
Pause.
MAN: Yes, it was the ‘Evening News’ was the last to go tonight. 
BARMAN: Not always the last though, is it, though? '
MAN: No. Oh no. I mean sometimes it’s the ‘News’. Other times it’s

one of the others. No way of telling beforehand. Until you’ve

got your last one left, of course. Then you can tell which one

it’s going to be.
BARMAN: Yes.

Pause. l
MAN: Oh yes.

Pause.

I think he must have left the area. 245

Unseen alert! If you are doing this as an Unseen, do not read on.

Harold Pinter Last to Go (1959)Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

 

ACTIVITY 26.7

Read the sketch in Passage 5 carefully and answer the questions, then discuss
with your classmates. Bearing in mind that this is a complete short play, doeS
any action take place on the stage?

I What topics are raised?
How many of them are repeated?

I
I Is there any discussion of these topics?
I The time is frequently referred to. What eﬂect does this have?
I

Are the two characters differentiated in any way? Do they have anything

in common?
I In what ways, if any, does the Old Man appear older than the Barman?
W I How many pauses can you ﬁnd here? What effect do they have?
‘ Phatic communication is I Does either character interrupt the other?
a kind ofsmall talk which is I How do you interpret the different attitudes to George?
Used SOClallyl not for ldeas or I What, if any, is the signiﬁcance of the title of this sketch: Last to G0?
information butto establish a C ,d th t fth I , .t h ? Wh , ht d.
familiaratmosphere‘ This kind I on51 er e one o e p ay  IS 1 umorous: ' ere mig an au .ICDCC
ofcommumcation is Often trivial laugh? Does it have pathos? Is 1tmenac1ng or sm1ster? (These are adjectives
and inconsequential but usually which have been used for Pinter’s later work.) Could you argue that it is
repetlthe and afﬁrmative, n6V8r ambiguous in its effect? What evidence would you use to do so?
exploiting differences ofopinion
but moving on from them to
- saferground. Do you ﬁnd this in
the play, or do you find it more h
unsettling? E Themes
Theatre ofthe Absurd '5 a E Work, time passing, being busy, purposeful but ultimately pointless
form ofdrama which began o . . .
m the 19505 and emphasises U travel, gos51p about common acquaintances, 1llness; none of these
the absurdity of existence. is discussed — merely referred to and repeated. These are the basic
it uses disjointed, repetitive, problems of just being alive which we all experience. 4
meaningless dialogue. The Pinter’s work is not easily categorised — it is as if he has thrown ,

situations shown are often
confusing and inconclusive and
the characters remain uncertain
and sometimes tormented. The
plots have little development.
The effect on the audience is
very disturbing, as you can
imagine. Examples ofthe form

away all the dramatic categories we are familiar with, such as comedy, g
tragedy, farce and so on. This dialogue is very close to everyday l
conversation of the kind we call phatic communication.

 

include plays by Samuel Beckett, . TIP

mduding his best_known play ‘ Context: Pinter has been associated with Theatre ofthe Absurd, but this passage

Wait/n9 for Godot, and by Eugéne * is an interpretation of naturalistic speech. It also has poetic qualities, with its 1
ionesco, repetitions of words and phrases, its rhythms and pauses. i

 

Unseen exercise (for class discussion)

Passage 6: from Our Country’s Good (1988) by Timberlake
Wertenbaker

Note: In the 17805, convicts and Royal Marines were sent to Australia as part of
the ﬁrst penal colony there. The convicts, who had often committed minor crimes
in England such as stealing a loaf when they were hungry, were treated with the

 

,,,Unit 26: Drama Unseens

 

utmost harshness. In this sequence the ofﬁcers are discussing the idea of the I
convicts putting on a play, The Recruiting Oﬁ‘icer by George Farquhar, a Restoration

playwright. Phillip is the governor, Ross is a major, Collins a judge, Tench and

Campbell are captains, Iohnson a Vicar. The rest are lieutenants. Sergeant Kite and

Captain Plume are characters in the proposed play.

TIP

Because Of the relatively
large number of characters
involved here, reading aloud

— with different students
taking a role each — will clarify
your discussions of each
character’s attitudes.

 

6

REV. JOHNSON:

RALPH:

REV. JOHNSON:

RALPH:

REV. JOHNSON:

ROSS:
CAMPBELL:
PHILLIP:

TENCH:

.PHILLIP:

DAWES:
TENCHZ

CAMPBELL:
ROSS:
COLLINS:
RALPH:

REV. JOHNSON:

RALPH:

REV. JOHNSON:

What is the plot, Ralph?

It’s about this recruiting ofﬁcer and his friend, and they
are in love with these two young ladies from Shrewsbury
and after some difﬁculties they marry them.

It sanctions Holy Matrimony, then?

Yes, yes, it does.

That wouldn’t do the convicts any harm. I’m having such
trouble getting them to marry instead Of this sordid
cohabitation they’re so used to.

Marriage, plays, why not a ball for the convicts!

Euuh. Boxing.

Some of these men will have ﬁnished their sentence in a
few years. They will become members of society again,
and help create a new society in this colony. Should

we not encourage them now to think in a free and
responsible manner?

I don’t see how a comedy about two lovers will do that,
Arthur.

The theatre is an expression Of civilisation. We belong to
a great country which has spawned great playwrights:
Shakespeare, Marlowe, Jonson, and even in our own
time, Sheridan. The convicts will be speaking a reﬁned
literate language and expressing sentiments of a delicacy
they are not used to. It will remind them that there

is more to life than crime, punishment. And we, this
colony Of a few hundred, will be watching this together,
for a few hours we will no longer be despised prisoners
and hated gaolers. We will laugh, we may be moved, we
may even think a little. Can you suggest something else
that will provide such an evening, Watkin?

Mapping the stars gives me more enjoyment, personally.
I’m not sure it’s a good idea having the convicts laugh at
ofﬁcers, Arthur.

No. Pheeoh, insubordination, heh, ehh, n0 discipline.
You want this Vice—ridden vermin to enjoy themselves?
They would only laugh at Sergeant Kite.

Captain Plume is a most attractive, noble fellow.

He’s not loose is he, Ralph? I hear many of these plays
are about rakes and encourage loose morals in women.
They do get married? Before, that is, before. And for the
right reasons.

They marry for love and to secure wealth.

That’s all right.

247Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

i


A

1

mmmwam-«w wnwvus no se

.cme‘AwWWMMWWM'mmM‘RWK

TIP
Context: play is a useful
example of late 20th—century
intertextuality. Based on a
novel entitled The Playmaker
by Thomas Keneally, and
also on the diaries of real
officers who sailed with the
First Fleet, it is clearly rooted
in historical facts about the
penal colonies. its post—
colonial concerns are evident
even in this short extract.
However, it is also a play
about staging a play, so that
Restoration drama, in the
form of The Recruiting Officer,
is also incorporated. You

will remember that the very
first activity in Part 2: Drama
was about the travelling
players in Hamlet who stage
a play within the play. Both
are therefore metafictional.
Above all, it claims that the
arts, represented here by
the theatre, have a
humanising, civilising,
egalitarian effect on people:
We will be watching this
together, as Phillip says.

i

 

I would simply say that if you want to build a civilisation
there are more important things than a play. If you want
to teach the convicts something, teach them to farm, to

build houses, teach them a sense of respect for property,

TENCH!

night, but above all, teach them how to work, not how to
sit around laughing at a comedy.

The Greeks believed that it was a citizen’s duty to watch
a play. It was a kind of work in that it required attention,
judgement, patience, all social virtues.

And the Greeks were conquered by the more practical
Romans, Arthur.

Indeed, the Romans built their bridges, but they also
spent many hours wishing they were Greeks. And they,
after all, were conquered by barbarians, or by their own
corrupt and small spirits.

Are you saying Rome would not have fallen if their
theatre had been better?

[very loud] Why not? [Everyone looks at him and he
continues, fast and nervously] In my own small way, in
just a few hours, I have seen something change. I asked
some of the convict women to read me some lines, these
women who behave often no better than animals. And
it seemed to me, as one or two — I’m not saying all of
them, not at all — but one or two, saying those well—
balanced lines of Mr Farquhar, they seemed to acquire a
dignity, they seemed — they seemed to lose some of their
corruption.

PHILLIP:

TENCH:

COLLINS:

TENCH:

RALPH:

i
2 l
l l
ba.mmmmwsmm.mwj Tim berlake Wertenbaker Our Country’s Good (1988)

ACTIVITY 26.8

Read Passage 6 and discuss the extract from the play by Wertenbaker. Below
is a checklist of discussion points.

TIP A“;
Probably the most useful i
activity you can undertake

to revise forthe Drama

exam is to go to the theatre.
There is nothing like seeing 5
live theatrical performance: -
no polished re—takes, no g
dubbing, no distance. Real 3
live actors speaking and doing
things in real time in front of
you — wonderful! ifyou can’t
manage this, try to act out i
some scenes from a play with
your class. Learn the lines, get 3
some rudimentary costumes ,
and props together — and g
enjoy yourselves! g

does each speaker have?

I What does this suggest about each of the speakers? What are their main
concerns?

I Look closely at the way each man speaks. How does their use of language
vary?

I What would you say is the main theme of this passage?

I How does the discussion of the classical theatre add to it?

I What is the difference, if any, between Phillips and Ralph’s attitude to the
play proposal?

I Highlight the most signiﬁcant points made in the discussion and justify
your choice.

wammmammwmmmm‘mmwwwwajEssay Skills and Techniques