Unit 21: Prose critical essays

Section 5: Prose 2

 

Unit 21: Prose critical essays

This section follows the same pattern as Section 4, with units on critical essays,
passage questions and Unseens.
The ﬁrst essay title covers an area which is very signiﬁcant in almost all novels:

 

Refer to the advice given on
essay writing in Part 3 ofthis

book and refresh your memory the relationship between an individual and the community, or society in general.
by {Coking again at the Prose If you have not studied a Thomas Hardy novel, keep this in mind as you read the
units in Part 1 (Units 7—11). essay, because its insights will help you to evaluate the novels you are studying.

Additionally, Hardy uses the great natural force of Egdon Heath. The relationship
between people and their natural environment is another great theme of the novel.

ACTIVITY 21.1

Read and consider the following essay on The Return of the Native (1878) by
Thomas Hardy.

Essay title: Discuss the way in which the novel explores the relationship
between the community and the individual characters in the novel.

 

 

Like many of Hardy’s novels, The Return ofthe Native is influenced by Greek
tragedy. As in the work of the Greek tragedians that Hardy was familiar with,
the relationship between the individual and his community is inevitably one i
of conflict. D. H. Lawrence called the novel a study ofthe way communities l
control their misfits which is a harsh but aptjudgement. The individual

must sacrifice any kind of independence in order to be accepted into the
community, or be labelled a ‘misfit’, and acting against the ‘rules’ of the
community will unavoidably mean a tragic end.

Clym and Eustacia are both characterised as out of the ordinary. Clym
Yeobright, the native who returns, has the typical countenance ofthe future. He
has a social conscience and aspirations which set him apart from the rustic
community who inhabit Egdon Heath. He wants to return to bring progress, 1
but it is more focused on himself than the Heath folk and their desires. 3
Eustacia We is perhaps even more unconventional. Her evident sexuality, the
hints of witchcraft (she is accused by Susan Nonsuch of allegedly bewitching
her children and is constantly associated with darkness): these illustrate
her individualistic nature. Hardy uses language to associate her with the
mythic rather than the naturalistic, too. She is Queen ofthe night and a model
goddess. These are all indications of a woman quite unlike the meek and
conventional Victorian ideal: she is contrasted with Thomasin, who is a well— I

171

>-
<
V)
U)
Lu
Lu
.1
D.
E
<
U)

 

integrated character, throughout. it is inevitable that these two characters
will come into conflict with the community represented by the chorus of
/ rustics, the community of those who live on Egdon Heath, colossal and
mysterious in its swarthy monotony.

The rustics who breathe the air of Egdon Heath are entirely in tune with it:
it is part of them as they are part of it. They are superstitious; their lives are
governed by customs and traditions which have existed for many years. The
Mummers’1 play is a case in point, and Eustacia’s involvement with it is not172

 
 
 
 
 
 

    
 

 

 

However, there are other characters
of the community. Thomasin may be a
with Eustacia, but she is satisfied with
ground as she calls it, as is the man sh

‘reddleman’z. D. H. Lawrence said of them that they had no

who survive and still remain part
colourless character compared
life on the Heath’s impersonal open

  

wedding symbolises the survival of
the community,just as Eustacia’s death shows the ruthless destruction of the
individual who doesn’t fit in.
Although Clym is an outsider, his situation is more complex than that of the
other characters. His dreams ofaltruistic philanthropy lead to tragedy as he
refuses to see the true needs and desires of the Heath folk. While he wants to
seek some rational occupation and do good, Hardy makes it evident that these
desires will be thwarted: the rural world was not ripe for him and a man should
be only/partially ahead ofhis time. The refusal to see the reality around him is
represented metaphorically in his physical blindness. He becomes a furze—
cutter3 eventually, drawing closer to the Heath, thereby appearing as a mere
parasite on its vast surface. His is the greatest tragedy in a sense: he wanted
to be a great social educator, taking the Heath folk away from superstition,

paganism and witchcraft, but ends up merely giving morally unimpeachable
lessons to the inhabitants about commonplace things.

Those who wish to change or escape the Heath and its community and

their customs are not successful in the novel; their lives will end tragically
or reductively. But those who are prepared to involve themselves in

conventional community life and accept the Heath ways will prosper. Society
will always be stronger than the individualist.

1 Mummer an actor in a folk play
5 in red dye for marking livestock
3 furze a prickly heath plant

2 reddleman a rural worker who dealUnit 21: Prose critical essays

ACTIVITY 21.2

Look at the main body of the essay and expand the range of illustrations and
references used.

When you have ﬁnished, see whether your research in the text has raised
further points to augment the argument. Is there enough in this essay about
the activities of the rustic chorus, for example? Would you like to see a
paragraph about Clym’s mother and how she ﬁts into the community?

 
  

  
 

TIP

At an advanced level, there are no simple ‘character sketch’ sorts of question and
those that focus in any way on character tend to be comparative, or link character
to the novel’s structure or language in some way.

   
    

The following essay outlines are on the topic of characterisation. Virginia Woolf’s
novel Mrs Dalloway links the main character with someone quite unlike her

— Septimus, a war survivor who is suffering from what we would now call post—
traumatic stress disorder. The two essay outlines which follow are both relevant
and thoughtful, yet they take different lines, with the exception of the penultimate
paragraphs, on the party, where both essays discuss the bringing together of the
two characters in Clarissa’s thoughts.

ACTIVITY 21.3

Read and consider the following essay title on Mrs Dalloway (1925) by
Virginia Woolf, and comment on the two essay outlines.

 

Essay title: Discuss Woolf’s handling of the connections between Septimus
and Clarissa in Mrs Dalloway.

ESSAY OUTLINE 1

Introduction

Woolf’s original intention for the novel was for Clarissa to commit suicide
but as she developed her ideas, she introduced another character — that of
Septimus — to commit suicide eventually. The characters are linked through
the novel and it reaches a climax where they are almost united at the end.

Main body 1
Both are sympathetic characters who reveal truths about themselves and
society. They both feel that life is ‘dangerous’ and difficult.

Main body2

Linked in their emotionality. Septimus is emotional and after the war fears
that he cannot feel any more after the death of Evans, his friend. Eventually he
feels so much that it drives him insane. Clarissa knows she can feel, but fears
aging and loneliness.

 

 

173Cambridge International A Level Literature in English

Portrait ofVirginia Woolf.

‘7'

 

 

Main body3

Both characters show the deficiencies of society but from different angles:
they are of different classes — Clarissa is part of society, but Septimus is
excluded from it. They both read books extensively and show their emotional
intelligence through this, while other characters do not read.

Main body 4

They never meet, but the idea that people are fundamentally linked expresses
the idea of a collective consciousness; Woolf uses tree and mist imagery to
develop this idea.

Main body 5

When Clarissa hears of Septimus’s death at the party, at first she feels
angrythat the Bradshaws have introduced death at her party, but she then
empathises with Septimus and there is a graphic description, which shows
her close connection with him. She respects his defiance and his attempt to
communicate.

Conclusion

Woolf uses the two characters to criticise society, to show the beauty of
the world and the importance of love. Their physical distance becomes
unimportant at the end of the novel when they almost seem to fuse in
Clarissa’s mind and it is at this moment that Peter Walsh sees her as most
‘herself’ — at her very best for there she was.

ESSAY OUTLINE 2

Introduction

Clarissa and Septimus have many similarities. First ofall they are both in
marriages which are not entirely satisfactory, causing feelings of isolation for
those within them. This sense of isolation remains with them throughout.

Main body 1
Both find moments ofjoy very fleeting and fear an emptiness, a lack of
meaning at the heart of life.

Main body 2

They both have a sense that they have lost an important part ofthemselves,
Clarissa because she is Mrs Richard Dalloway, not herself, and Septimus
because he feels he has lost his identity because of the war and his part

in it.

Main body 3

They both feel a strong connection with nature, yet have thoughts of

death when out in the natural world of the park. Thoughts ofdeath are

never far from their minds. They both also think of old people they have
encountered.

Main body4
They are brought together by the party, though not physically, when Clarissa
hears of his death and feels admiration for what he has done.

Conclusion

The characters are connected from the very first words ofthe novel when
Woolf writes What a lark! What a plunge, which foreshadows the end of the
novel right at the beginning: both Clarissa’s party and Septimus’s suicidal fall.
it also suggests the mixture of life-affirming and tragic elements in the novel.

 

 

 

JTIP
Context: the effects of the

First World War and of the
patriarchal society are
elements which could validly
be developed as a contextual

background.

COMMENT

Unit 21: Prose critical essays

The ﬁrst essay is planned to range quite Widely, with some consideration
of social criticism, as well as collective consciousness. The second plan
has an emphasis on feelings of loneliness. Both use a ﬁnal quotation

to very good effect: the ﬁrst to emphasise the beauty of Clarissa’s
imaginative empathy and the second to make an interesting structural
point about the way the novel is written, together with some comment
on its complex mood and tone. Both approaches are valid.

175