Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Unit 5: Rhyme and sound effects

When people are asked what gives poetry its special quality, nine out of ten will
mention rhyme ﬁrst. This is not only because we remember the nursery rhymes and
poems of our childhood; it’s also because we know instinctively that sounds are an

 
   

Rhyme is.the-agreement in ’r I 
sound betweenfwo'rdsjorj : '

syllables. Théséwords rhyme:  5, integral part of the meaning of words in poems.

nights/gm, ﬁght;;so_dothe5es’ j i r This echoing of sounds can give pleasure to the hearer and is probably

fU/ing;»dylflgy~lmP/yihga _ I. L J ‘ associated with the pleasure we have in music. Even tiny children love rhyme:

internal rhyme is; When words : their delight in nursery rhymes such as Humpty Dumpty is largely because the

Within the Samé llné rhyme ' L words ‘go together’ in sound — and of course the rhythms are usually very regular
too.

Rhyme also helps to structure or shape poetry, organising the verse, binding
it together and intensifying the meaning, because words that rhyme are more
noticeable than words that don’t rhyme. This is an effect similar to a random Visual
pattern where you would notice a repeated motif immediately.

Some poets never use rhyme, but it is the commonest and one of the oldest
forms of metrical device, even so. Your analysis of metre or scansion will therefore
often include the consideration of rhyme. It is usually thought of as occurring at the

ends of lines of poetry, but it can also occur within lines, in which case it is known
as internal rhyme.

H How to indicate a rhyme scheme

The accepted method of indicating a rhyme scheme is to use small letters of the
alphabet to denote the rhyming sounds at the ends of lines. Remember, it’s the
sound not the spelling of the words which is important; you’ll need to say the words

over to yourself to see if they rhyme. After all, English spelling being what it is,
cough rhymes with of!

Here is a pair of rhyming couplets:

A mighty creature is the germ, a
Though smaller than the pachyderm. a
His customary dwellingplace b
Is deep within the human race. b

Ogden Nash The Germ (1902—1971)

If you were to use the terminology you already know, together with this new
information, you might say something like this:

The regular iambic tetrameter together with the rhyming couplets aabb
create a comic effect here. The pairing of germ with pachyderm (elephant) is
particularly incongruous.

Although accurate, it wouldn’t be very helpful just to say ‘This poem rhymes aabb’
without any analytical comment.Unit 5: Rhyme and sound effects

 

ACTIVITY 5.1

Now try these two stanzas from The Rime of the Ancient Mariner by
Coleridge. On a copy, mark the metre (it’s a regular one) and indicate the
rhyme by underlining rhyming words and putting a, b, c, and so on.

And now there came both mist and snow,
And it grew wondrous cold:

And ice, mast-high, came ﬂoating by,

As green as emerald.

And through the drifts the snowy clifts
Did send a dismalsheen:
Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken—
The ice was all between.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge The Rime ofthe Ancient Mariner (1834)

Did you notice the internal rhyme in line 3 of the ﬁrst stanza and lines 1 and 3 of
the second? You still say ‘It rhymes abcb’, but also ‘There are internal rhymes in
lines 1 and 3’. The rhythmical and rhyming eifects are very obvious in these two
stanzas; say them out loud to hear what a thrilling effect they have.

Different rhyme schemes

ACTIVITY 5.2

Look at the following poems, or extracts from poems, and note the rhyme
schemes using the alphabetical notation you’ve learned.

33

1

I was angry with my friend:

I told my wrath, my wrath did end. wrath = anger
I was angry with my foe:

I told it not, my wrath did grow.

William BlakeA Poison Tree (1794)

2

I have come to the borders of sleep,
The unfathomable deep

Forest where all must lose

Their way, however straight,

Or winding, soon or late;

They cannot choose.

Edward Thomas Lights Out (1971)Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

3 ,

Side by side, their faces blurred,
The earl and countess lie in stone,
Their proper habits vaguely shown
As jointed armour, stiffened pleat,
And that faint hint of the absurd —
The little dogs under their feet.

Philip La rkin An Arundel Tomb (1964)

4
These, in the day when heaven was falling,
The hour when earth’s foundations ﬂed,
Followed their mercenary calling
And took their wages and are dead.

Their shoulders held the sky suspended;
They stood, and earth’s foundations stay;
What God abandoned, these defended,

And saved the sum of things for pay.

A. E. Housman Epitaph on an Army ofMercenaries (1914)

5
What passing—bells for these who die as cattle?
a Only the monstrous anger of the guns.
Only the stuttering riﬂes’ rapid rattle
Can patter out their hasty orisons.
No mockeries now for them; no prayers nor bells,
Nor any voice of mourning save the choirs,—

The shrill, demented Choirs of wailing shells;
And bugles calling for them from sad shires.

i
What candles may be held to speed them all? (
Not in the hands of boys, but in their eyes  ‘
Shall shine the holy glimmers of good-byes. l l
The pallor of girls’ brows shall be their pall; 1
Their ﬂowers the tenderness of patient minds, i
And each slow dusk a drawing-down of blinds.

Wilfred Owen Anthem for Doomed Youth (1917)Unit 5: Rhyme and sound effects

A soldier from the First World War.

COMMENT

p‘ Feminine rhyme is a’ 'rhymeon twosylla
‘ and suspended and defended; " ' ‘ ‘

35
Some of these rhyme schemes are simple and others are more complex

in the way that the rhyming sounds are interwoven.

1 aabb

aabccb

abbcac

abab (with the a rhymes feminine and the b rhymes masculine)

ababcdcd; effegg

01th

The ﬁnal example’s rhyme scheme is typical of the sonnet form in which
the poem is written. (The sonnet is discussed in Unit 3.)

 

Masculine rhymégis a‘ihyméon‘oné syllableonly, as used by Biakéj mas: a d  Wt; “
above." ‘ ‘ r T m4  ' t ,  _ « . ~; 

 

 

‘bl‘es, as Housman useson falling aindr'ga“

 

Edr¢hymé is a‘true rhyme Wh‘e‘nsp‘oken aloud, but looks asif’be byits‘i ‘71 - ‘

spelling. Choirs and Shires, in‘Owen’s poem arelike this (as are them/lords cough‘afn pff  

mentioned earlier).

    
  
  

‘uft' d‘Qé‘sij’thV - ‘j ‘ 7

Eye—rhyme is :a‘myme‘that [Qbks‘asyif it should rhyme  ‘ _
iafijdpébugh»:  ,_

— there are no examples of'thijs in the poems above, but the-We sire
would be eye—rhymes, " ‘ ' LHalf-rhyme repeatsthe final,
consonantsound in words
without thevovvelsoun'd

carrespohidmg. Where the use
"of a full rhyme may give an
impression of confidence and
completeness, a half—rhyme can
help to create a sense of unease
or disturbance. You may also
come across the terms imperfect,
near, oblique, off and slant rhyme
— they mean the same.

 

 

Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

 

Half-rhyme or pararhyme

Half~rhyme is widely used in modern and contemporary poetry. Wilfred Owen,
whose sonnet you have just analysed for full rhyme, used half—rhyme extensively in
other poems he wrote. Half-rhyme and pararhyme are the most common names
but there are others, such as near, approximate and slant rhyme.

The effect of half-rhyme

The extract from An Arandel Tomb you looked at on page 34 has full rhymes
throughout, until its very ﬁnal lines, where the poet uses a half—rhyme in conclusion.

Time has transﬁgareal them into
Untrath. The stoneﬁdelity b
They hardly meant has come to be
Theirﬁnal hlazon, and to prove

Oar almost—instinct almost true: a
What will survive ofas is love.

c (half—rhyme)

c (half—rhyme)

 

Sometimes the last line of this poem is taken out of its context and quoted to prove
a point (an optimistic point about human nature), but it can’t be read in such a way.
The poet’s use of the two almosts in the penultimate (second to last) line warns the . 1 
reader that the statement is being subtly qualiﬁed and this is enhanced by the poet’s
use of the half-rhyme on prove and love. You’ll notice that the half—rhyme here
takes the form of an eye~rhyme In the following stanza (the beginning of Strange
Meeting by Wilfred Owen), the half-rhymes are mostly not eye—rhymes.

ACTIVITY 5.3

Find the words which half-rhyme at the ends of these lines:

mam

It seemed that out of battle I escaped 1
Down some profound dull tunnel, long since scooped 
Through granites which Titanic wars had groined. l
Yet also there encumbered sleepers groaned,

Too fast in thought or death to be bestirred.

Then, as I probed them, one sprang up, and stared

With piteous recognition in ﬁxed eyes,

Lifting distressful hands as if to bless.

And by his smile, I knew that sullen hall;

By his dead smile I knew we stood in Hell.

Wilfred Owen Strange Meeting (circa 1918)

The half-rhyme here runs aabb, as it does throughout this war poem, in which
the poet imagines meeting someone in the afterlife, who turns out to be the
enemy he had killed on the battleﬁeld. The sombre tone of the poem depends on
the skilful use of pararhyme, where perfection and clarity are always out of reach
and the dreamlike atmosphere is central.' k back at the short poem .
tthe man practising tai—chi
it 1 and you will find many

mes at the ends of lines.

rhy

 
  
  

1 KEY TRMS

on, assonance, , I,
nce,onomatop0eia  ’
tions on this page; ‘

Unit 5: Rhyme and sound effects

ACTIVITY 5.4

Here is the middle stanza of a poem by Elizabeth Jennings called The
Enemies, where the mysterious, disturbing quality of the invasion is enhanced
by the use of loose half—rhymes. You might not notice them unless you look
closely. Find the half-rhymes andnote the rhyme scheme in the usual way
(using a, b, c, and so on).

Now in the morning all the town is ﬁlled
With stories of the swift and dark invasion;
The women say that not one stranger told
A reason for his coming. The intrusion
Was not for devastation:

Peace is apparent still on hearth and ﬁeld.

Elizabeth Jennings The Enemies

Other effects of sound

Rhyme is only one of several features of language in poetry which use the sounds of
words to inﬂuence or reﬂect their meaning. Among these features are alliteration,
assonance, consonance and onomatopoeia.

Alliteration

Alliteration is the repetition of consonant sounds especially at the beginning of
words; poets have used it for centuries. In Old English verse (before the Norman

v invasion of 1066), alliteration was an essential part of the metrical scheme of poems

and even more important than rhyme. It is still used widely for particular eﬂects. A
modem poet such as Ezra Pound, whose poem In a Station of the Metro you have
already studied, wrote a version of an Old English poem called The Seafarer and he
included all the alliteration from the original; you can appreciate its ﬂavour without
having to learn the old language. Here’s part of it (the letters which alliterate are
underlined):

May I, for my own selﬁ song’s truth reckon,
Ioarney’s jargon, how I in harsh days
ﬂardship endured 0ft.

ﬁitter breast—cares have I ahided, 

Ezra Pound The Seafarer (1915)

The ﬁrst lines of James Elroy Flecker’s poem The Old Ships (1915) alliterates
evocatively:

I have seen old ships sail like swans asleep 

Alliteration can also be an essential ingredient of the fun in comic verse or tongue-
twisters such as Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled pepper or She sells sea shells 0n
the sea shore.

37Cambridge International AS Level Literature in English

Assonance is the repetition of vowel sounds within words that have different
consonants. There is assonance in the long ‘0’ sound in the following words: home,
road, bone, foe, and there are many examples in Tennyson’s poem in activity 5.5.

Consonance has identical consonants but different vowels, such as slip and slop,
creak and crank. The kind of half—rhyme used by Wilfred Owen in Miners (see page
44) is largely a kind of consonance.

   

There are a number of words whose sound seems to imitate their meaning, so that
the sound reﬂects the sense of the word. That is the deﬁnition of onomatopoeia,

or echoism as it is sometimes called. English is a very onomatopoeic language and
perfectly suited to poetry. Look at the effects below. It’s not just words like buzz and
whoosh!

   

There’s more to analysing the effect of these sound patterns than just underlining
sounds which are the same as each other. The speech sound itself which is being
repeated may well have a particular effect, and you should try to identify this.
Here are examples of some of the sounds:

I k, g, ch, qu, st, ts These can be hard, violent sounds, noisy and harsh: try saying
crag, clock, biggest, stick; t and d can have a similar effect.

I m, n, ng These are humming, singing, musical sounds which can also have a
gently sinister effect: humming, moaning, murmuring.

I f, w These sound soft and light: ﬂow, ﬂy, winnow, furrow.

 

The Lotos Eaters by G. J. Staniland, after Tennyson’s poem.i TIP

Undertimed conditions

you do not have time for
extensive comment on
rhythms, rhymes and sound
effects. But a few well—chosen
examples will enhance your
work immensely.

Wm -_M. 1::"14;.~>,€~» vae/v-wa-F w, 132,44...’ «

ﬂammavml“

a”:t1\4';7<\4£vrgiyu¥n me. "warm". mm «any»?

Unit 5: Rhyme and sound effects

You could continue in this vein: 2 sounds harsh and $11 sounds soothing; long
vowels sound slower and more peaceful, while short ones give the impression of
quick movement.

You may feel that such close examination of English sounds is slightly
ridiculous. Certainly, if you’ve never really considered the sounds of our words,
some of the claims made above may seem far-fetched. But when several groups
of students were asked which ten words they thought were the most beautiful—
sounding in the English language, some words seemed to be on everyone’s list. They
were all words whose sound reﬂected and intensiﬁed their meaning: words like
cool, moon, velvet, softness and mellow. So it seems that some words have a powerful
effect when meaning and sound coincide. What would your ten words be?

ACTIVITY 5.5

Review what you’ve learned in this unit and the previous one, then read and
enjoy the sounds and rhythms of the following lines, the choric song from
Tennyson’s poem The Lows-Eaters.

There is sweet music here that softer falls

Than petals from blown roses on the grass,

Or night—dews on still waters between walls

Of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass;

Music that gentlier on the spirit lies,

Than tir’d eyelids upon tir’d eyes;

Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissful skies.
Here are cool mosses deep,

And thro’ the moss the ivies creep,

And in the stream the long—leaved ﬂowers weep,
And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep.

An extract from Alfred Lord Tennyson The Lotos-Eaters (1832)

 

39