
At the beginning of February, Billy Ray Harris was a homeless man who spent his days begging from tourists in a plaza in Kansas City and wash— ing in a public fountain. His family feared that he was dead.  Six weeks later, after an act of kindness that seemed tailormade for American television, Mr Harris sat on a sofa in the studios of The Today Show, about to be reunited with his siblings.  Mr Harris’s decision to return a diamond engagement ring to a young woman who accidentally dropped it in his begging cup has earned him plaudits all over the world.  ‘This is a big pay-off, ’ he said yesterday, after his brother and two sisters emerged to greet him.  Besides meeting his family for the ﬁrst time in years, he now has a roof over his head, a job, and the expectation that he will become at least $1 86,000 richer thanks to donations from 8,000 people around the world.

He admitted that he had considered selling the ring after it was dropped into his cup   by a young woman named Sarah Darling, and he took it to a jeweller. ‘Nearly had a ﬁt I when the guy told me it was really worth some money, ’ he said. ‘He was ready to give me four grand right there on the spot.’
But he held on to the engagement ring and returned it to Ms Darling when she went looking for it a few days later. Her husband, Bill Krejci, set up an online fundraising page hoping to raise $1,000 for Mr Harris as a reward. Instead, as the story spread, tens of thousands of dollars were donated.

Ten facts about malaria • a preventable disease that affects almost half the world's population and causes over 660,000 deaths per year • an infection caused by the malaria parasite entering the bloodstream, usually through the bite of an infected mosquito 
• over 90 percent of deaths occur in sub-Saharan Africa • 3,000 children die of malaria every day • only the female mosquito transmits the disease • sleeping under a mosquito net is essential in affected regions • children under five are most at risk • the disease exists in 109 countries in the world • mosquitoes breed where there is an abundance of humidity and rain • symptoms are fever, chills and headache 



When I was at school, we had to eat the world’s plenty and leaves pollution,
everything on our plates, no matter overcrowding, disease and famine in its wake.
now nasty, because starving children Somehow that doesn’t stop us wasting food
in Africa would have been grateful for it - in astonishing quantities. As much as half of
something incomprehensible to schoolchildren all the food produced in the world - 2 billion
today. But the world is smaller now, and there tonnes - ends up as waste. It never makes it to
is an obvious relationship between what I eat the plate. This is enough to startle anyone out
and what others don’t, and can’t. Increasingly, of statistics fatigue.

poor storage and poor infrastructure are to There are some more comprehensive
blame. The losses are between the field and solutions. The first would be to make the
the marketplace. But in the developed world disposal of food waste less convenient. It can
we throw good food away or don’t bother be left outside in bins for ages, and someone
to harvest it. We just waste it. And this is not will remove it, however revolting its state.
simply a squandering of the food itself; it is an That should stop, and it should be possible
unnecessary waste of the land, water and energy to get rid of unwanted food only in very small
resources that were used in the production, quantities. Schools ought to make pupils
processing and distribution of this food. aware of this terrible waste, and this moral

Most of what is wasted could perfectly well should be taken right down to the dinner
have been eaten. Most waste occurs when we plate: today’s children should be told to finish
put into the bin potatoes, bread, fruit, salad, eating what they’ve been given and why it is
meat and fish. More than a quarter of what important. Charities should create images
is thrown away is still in its plastic wrapping. of undernourished children next to lorries
Most of the billions of tonnes of waste food pouring good vegetables and bread into
goes into landfill, where it generates methane. landfill sites.

Supermarkets in western countries throw At the moment people simply don’t

away misshapen fruit and vegetables and insist understand what waste really means, and

on pointless perfection. Lots of people have they should be forced to think about it.
blamed supermarket sell-by dates for being Extravagance isn’t really glamorous or

far too cautious and their ‘buy-one-get-one- appealing at all when it comes to food. It is a
free’ deals for encouraging over-buying which sin against other people.

is certain to cause waste. All this could and *' Minette Marrin, Sunday Times
should be dealt with.

Dearest Kitty, 
Last night before dinner I tucked 
the letter I'd written into Father's 
pocket. According to Margot, he 
read it and was upset for the rest 
of the evening. (I was upstairs 
washing up!) Poor Pim, I might 
have known what the effect of 
such an epistle would be. He's 
so sensitive! I immediately told 
Peter not to ask questions or 
say anything more. Pim's said 
nothing else to me about the 
matter. Is he going to? 
Yours, Anne M. Frank 

Dearest Kitty, 
Father and I had a long talk yesterday afternoon. I cried my eyes 
out, and he cried too. Do you know what he said to me, Kitty? 
`I've received many letters in my lifetime, but none as hurtful 
as this. You, who have had so much love from your parents. You, 
whose parents have always been ready to help you, who have 
always defended you, no matter what. You talk of not having to 
account to us for your actions! You feel you've been wronged 
and left to your own devices. No, Anne, you've done us a great 
injustice... No, Anne, we have done nothing to deserve such 
a reproach!' 

Oh, I’ve failed miserably. This is the worst thing I’ve ever done 
in my entire life. I used my tears to show off, to make myself 
seem important so he’d respect me. I’ve certainly had my share of 
unhappiness, and everything I said about Mother is true. But to
accuse Pim, who’s so good and who’s done everything for me - no,
that was too cruel for words.

It’s good that someone has finally cut me down to size, has broken 
my pride, because I’ve been far too smug. Not everything Mistress
Anne does is good! Anyone who deliberately causes such pain to
someone they say they love is despicable, the lowest of the low!

What I’m most ashamed of is the way that Father has forgiven
me; he said he’s going to throw the letter in the stove, and he’s
being so nice to me now, as if he were the one who’d done
something wrong. Well, Anne, you still have a lot to learn. It’s time
you made a beginning, instead of looking down on other people
and always blaming them!

I’ve known a lot of sorrow, but who hasn’t at my age? I’ve been
putting on an act, but was hardly even aware of it. I’ve felt lonely,

but never desperate! Not like Father, who once ran out into the
street with a knife so that he could put an end to it all. I’ve never 5:
gone that far. 

I should be deeply ashamed of myself, and I am. What’s done
can’t be undone, but at least you can keep it from happening again. 
I’d like to start all over again, and that shouldn’t be difficult, now
that I have Peter. With him supporting me, I know I can do it! I’m 
not alone any more. I have my books, my writing and my diary I’m 
not all that ugly, or that stupid, I have a sunny disposition, and I 
want to develop a good character!

Yes, Anne, you knew full well that your letter was unkind and
untrue, but you were actually proud of it! I’ll take Father as my
example once again, and I will improve myself.

Dear Supporter The solitary and elusive snow leopard has lived undisturbed in the mountains of central Asia for thousands of years. But poaching and pressures from unsustainable human development are now threatening the future of this stunning and unique creature. It is extremely vulnerable to the activities of people — and is now classed as endangered. Populations of snow leopards are in decline throughout their natural habitat —with as few as 300 now thought to be left in the Himalayan kingdom of Nepal. Life is very hard for them in these rugged mountains, with declining food sources. It is vital that we act now — or risk losing them in the wild for ever. Will you help us protect the last remaining snow leopards in the Himalayas? A four-man patrol team monitors the population, checking known snow leopard areas to keep track of what is happening to them. The team advises locals on how to protect their livestock, so that the snow leopards are not shot in retaliation for attacking sheep and goats. Money is needed urgently to enable this team to continue their essential work in saving the few remaining snow leopards. By sending us a donation you will be helping us to protect the beautiful snow leopard. Your generosity really could make a huge difference. 

The future will have lost many species of animal. Tigers may be one of them. Hunted for their pelt and bones and losing their habitat and prey, tiger populations are threatened throughout their natural habitats. In many places, they struggle for survival with burgeoning human populations competing for similar resources. For over 1,000 years, tigers have been hunted as status symbols, for decorative items such as wall and floor coverings, as souvenirs and curios, and for use in traditional Asian medicines. Hunting for sport probably caused the greatest decline in tiger populations up until the 1930s. In many areas tigers were also regarded as a pest that needed to be exterminated. Between 1940 and the late 1980s, the greatest threat was loss of habitat due to human population expansion and activities such as logging. In the early 1990s, the trade in tiger bone for traditional medicines became a major threat. 
440 Work in pairs. 
Many countries lack the capacity and resources to properly monitor tiger and prey populations. Policies conducive to ensuring long-term survival of the tiger are often lacking. Where they do exist, implementation is often ineffective. 

Threats to tigers Human activities are the principal cause of declining tiger numbers. Hunting was a major cause of mortality in the past, both for trophies and as part of organised pest control measures. Poaching and illegal killing, for example by livestock owners, remains one of today's major threats to the survival of this species, particularly with the growing demand for tiger bones in Oriental 'medicine'. '4004 '" The demand for remedies made from tiger parts has grown due to increasing affluence in Asia, and laws preventing international trade in tiger parts are largely ignored. Hong 
Kong is the main importer of tiger products, with tiger bone the most used part. The bones are crushed to be used in anti-inflammatory drugs for rheumatism and arthritis, among many other uses. The trade in tiger skins is also increasing. Habitat loss has occurred throughout much of the tiger's range and is now severely threatening its survival; as land becomes rapidly developed to meet the increasing demands of the Asian population, tiger populations become isolated in remaining fragments of wilderness and ultimately die out. The tiger's natural prey species have declined in numbers due to over-hunting, which has led tigers in some areas to turn to domestic livestock as a source of food, inevitably causing conflict with local farmers. 

Conservation 
Of the six surviving subspecies of tiger, the futures of the South China tiger d t Siberian tiger seem particularly bleak. Recent extensive surveys resulted in no sign India has the greatest number of tigers, but even the Bengal tiger population is estimate at no more than 2,500 individuals. The combined global figure for all remaining subspecies is estimated at between 3,200 and 4,000 tigers. The Indian government established Project Tiger in 1973, with the aim of conserving the country's tiger population. Within India there are currently 21 tiger reserves, although these are increasingly threatened by human pressures on the land. The key to the survival of the tiger is the maintenance of large tracts of adjacent habitat, but protection of this species is complicated by its man-eater reputation and by the threat it poses to livestock. The involvement and commitment of local people will be vital for the future sustainability of this most regal of cats. 

