
Workaholic parents think they can compensate for the time they don’t spend with their children by buying them more toys. But recent research suggests that this ploy is actually leading to children losing the ability to play properly. Younger children, in particular those aged ﬁve or under, can be overwhelmed by too much choice, and end up playing less than children with fewer, more valued toys and games. In addition, a surfeit of toys can prevent the of other skills; parental time spent with the child, playing with them, reading or even singing to them, is developmentally far superior, regardless of parental income level.

This is the View of a professor of educational psychology, following a study of 3,000 children from the ages of three to ﬁve. She said that, ‘When children own a large number of toys they are distracted and they do not learn or play well. They move from one to the other and do not settle to anything.’

Western parents now spend 5 billion dollars W buying 423 million toys each year, according to  the latest ﬁgures, amounting to an average of  $500 per child. Research suggests that there are  8 billion dollars’ worth of unused toys in homes  in just one European country.
But there are signs of change. Some parents  have begun to encourage their children to play  outside, and to give them board games instead  of guns and dolls. They even give them empty  development of cardboard boxes: many toys restrict children’s  imaginations, whereas an empty box could become anything.

A professor of early childhood education at an American university thinks that parents should restrict their children’s access to toys. He said: ‘It is a myth that the children with the most toys are happier and cleverer than those who only have a few favourites, and  whose parents don’t rush out to buy the latest plaything.’ The view of the experts is that having many toys creates a feeling of being overwhelmed, and that the fallacy that more is better needs to be eradicated from the thinking of the professional classes in the west. Research has shown that having fewer toys leads to an increase in sharing toys with others, and to  communal rather than isolated play, which can only be beneﬁcial to child development. 


Just Google it! I'm in the middle of a fight. My mother and I can't agree on who was the actor who played the detective in the film we saw last week. Was it ? 'Just Google it,' my sister intervenes. Yesterday, I couldn't remember what singer looked like. 'Just Google it,' my colleague told me. When I'd lost the recipe for my favourite , my friend's answer was instant: 'Just Google it.' Two words. It's become as simple as that to find the answer to most of life's questions. Hit Google and you'll know the answer to everything under the sun — and instantly. You could find out, for example, whether there is , or why the , or even when  You don't need to go to a shrink any more; the search engine can provide you with the sanest and best advice anyone has ever given. In fact there's even a Church of Google that believes that Google is all-knowing and therefore divine! But the god to whom we address all questions has taken the fun out of a fight. There is no scope for speculation any more —Google has ruined all my chances of being right on a bluff. Google has been around for little more than a decade, but it has changed the way we remember for ever. It has tamed my enthusiasm to memorise things, but it has given me access to facts about the things I love. I don't think my father, at the age of 29, could have rattled off answers about who was or what a is or when to , one after the other. Human help used to be needed to tell us how to prune a bonsai or to cook a  or to a  
The truth is, I am miserable and can't live without my search engine, either at work or at home. Google has helped me grow mentally — even though I am much less fit physically — when I happily sit at a desk the whole day long, just Googling.

Karan was 17 when he first played the popular online game Counterstrike. Soon, an entire evening was not enough and he started skipping classes, eventually bunking off school entirely. `We got a call from the school saying he had not been attending for four months,' said his father. Karan, which is a pseudonym because he did not want to be identified, suffers from what 
doctors call an 'Internet addiction disorder'. Last week, as the internet turned 40, the first residential treatment centre for online addicts opened in the US. According to psychiatrists, excessive  internet use becomes pathological if it interferes with a person's daily life and if he or she suffers from withdrawal symptoms  when deprived of access for more than an hour. Karan has been undergoing counselling. Anecdotal evidence suggests he's among a rising number of people caught in the internet's web. `I have been counselling six to eight new cases of internet addiction every month this year,' said Mumbai-based psychiatrist Dr Seema Hingorrany, adding that her patients ranged from 10-year-olds to those in their 50s. Many of them tell her that they don't see that there is any problem with surfing and game playing, even though they do very little else. 

Picking up a book is one of the cheapest entertainments around. The simple act of reading what you are doing now - has been characterised as everything from a silent conversation and a tool for building a better life to a refuge from reality and a technique for time travel. A story has the power not only to place you in another life, but also to connect you to otherwise indifferent individuals. With enough books and enough people, you build a shared culture. Imagine that you couldn't read. This is the case for 774 million adults around the world. Those are the unlucky masses who have never had the tools to build a better life, taken refuge from reality, or time-travelled. Even worse, 75 million children will soon join them as illiterate adults. In a childhood that is often characterised by days with little to eat, sick or elderly relatives to care for, or dirty, airless factories to work in, not being able to read is an added punishment. It denies them any form of escape. Learning to read and write has the amazing capacity to change lives. An education can increase your income; an education can teach 
(3y 
you about disease; an education can make a person more confident, more responsible, more able to contribute to the lives of others and to their country. This is where the power of reading truly lies. It is that subtle force that can move mountains, as well as minds. My hope is that reading, without which education is impossible, will finally be universally recognised and valued for its ability to bring personal and social development to the global community.

Scientists are trying to create the world's first robot teacher with the capacity to respond to a child's moods and emotions in the classroom. The personal, empathetic and human qualities that make a good teacher would first be analysed before being programmed into the robot. Working one-to-one with the machine, children would be able to communicate through a touchscreen on their desks, the designers say. The robot would gather information via sensors and cameras, allowing it to recognise emotions using clues such as the child's facial expressions and body language, to cross-reference against its database. 
Although the project is intended to find new ways of teaching and learning — and will begin by training the robot to teach geography to pupils aged between 11 and 13 — the implications of endowing machines with the ability to recognise and respond to emotions are far wider. The unconventional teacher will be able to sense when one of its pupils is upset or struggling to cope. It would then provide the appropriate comfort and support. If all goes to plan, the robot will be able to speak and move its head and arms, assess how well each child is doing and adapt its teaching style or material appropriately, just as its human equivalent should. Some teachers have reacted with scepticism to this project, which is called Emote, saying that a large part of what makes a teacher effective is the building up of trust. Children are naturally curious and it is through conversations with their teachers that cognitive and emotional skills develop. A robot cannot know a child in the same way as a parent or teacher. Others say that we should not be scared of using new technologies to widen professional expertise in order to enhance teaching methods and improve the life chances of young people. 

Today we have a poet in the class.
A real live poet with a published book.
Notice the inkstained fingers girls. Perhaps
we’re going to witness verse hot from the press.
Who knows. Please show your appreciation
by clapping. Not too loud. Now
sit up straight and listen. Remember
the lesson on assonance, for not all poems,
sadly, rhyme these days. Still. Never mind.
Whispering’s, as always, out of bounds
but do feel free to raise some questions.
After all, we’re paying forty pounds.
Those of you with English Second Language,
see me after break. We’re fortunate
to have this person in our midst.
Season of mists and so on and so forth.
I’ve written quite a bit of poetry myself,
am doing Kipling with the Lower Fourth.
Right. That’s enough from me. On with the Muse.
Open a window at the back. We don’t
want winds of change about the place.
Take notes, but don’t write reams. Just an essay


on the poet’s themes. Fine. Off we go.

Convince us that there’s something we don’t know.
Well. Really. Run along now girls. I’m sure

that gave an insight to an outside View

Applause will do. Thank you

very much for coming here today. Lunch

in the hall? Do hang about. Unfortunately

I have to dash. Tracey will show you out.

Is there any difference then, so far as you are concerned, between life for your children and education? No, life is education. All life. For most people, education has become a preparation for work, then life becomes work. We do not believe that is education. As far as you are concerned, every experience they have from the moment they wake up until they go to sleep is part of their education. There are no set hours, if that's what you mean. Yes, it's a continuous education. It isn't a matter of what facts you know — more a matter of finding and getting the facts you need, learning how to use what you've got in a constantly changing situation. That's not pie in the sky, that's a tough assignment. Children with heads stuffed full of facts and figures do not interest me. The quest for ideas, that is what we are trying to achieve. If, for example, Michael wrote a story or a letter — if he could write — would you correct it? If he asked me to correct it, yes. 

If not, you would leave it uncorrected. Yes You would allow him to send the letter uncorrected. Yes, of course. What is important is the child's sense of achievement, not the quality of the spelling or punctuation. And yet Michael is eleven and still cannot read, and Laura did not learn to read until she was sixteen. That is correct. Do you not think she might have learned to read much earlier if she had gone to school in the usual way? That's not important. You keep looking for a standard. You must be here at such and such a time. That's what happens in schools. It's a fiercely competitive attitude and it sets people against each other right from the start. Yes, but what you are describing to me as an alternative, Mrs Wyatt, is nothing more than a creative form of truancy. By adopting your-policy of 'the children will learn when they want to learn to read', you are neglecting — more than that — you are abandoning the learning potential of your children to read or write. You have made no active attempts to rectify Michael's basic lack of skill in this area. By denying him the facilities of a full-time education, as the law requires, you are failing to cause your son to receive education `suitable to his age, ability and aptitude'. How can this kind of negligence be categorized as efficient education? 
