Many people believe and have tried to prove that the Great Pyramid at Giza in Egypt, known as the Cheops or Khufu pyramid, has paranormal properties because of its shape. In particular, they believe that it has the ability to preserve food and to sharpen razor blades. Here is the process to be followed: cut four equilateral triangles of any size from cardboard; construct a pyramid by taping the sides of the triangle sides together; align the pyramid so that the baselines point at magnetic north and south. - ‘ The French hardware-store owner Antoine Bovis claimed in 1930 that small models of pyramids have restorative and preservative properties. Unveriﬁable stories persist that Bovis discovered this paranormal force whilst inside the King’s Chamber of the Great  Pyramid. According to legend, he noticed that animals that had L wandered into the pyramid and died there had not decomposed, and he deduced that it was the shape of the pyramid which was preventing their decay. Bovis is on record as having denied ever visiting Egypt. He claims that he arrived at his pseudoscientific belief through a process of reason and experiment. He explains in his self published book that he built a model of the pyramid and proved to his own satisfaction that pieces of meat and fish became mummiﬁed.  Inspired by Bovis, a Czech called Drbal applied for a patent for the ‘Pharaoh’s Shaving Device’, which allegedly used the magnetic field generated by cardboard model pyramids to keep razor blades sharp. He was not able to explain how exactly it worked. Investigation revealed that similar claims had been made about ‘pyramid power ’ decades earlier.  In 2005, in an episode of MythBusters on the television Discovery Channel, a basic test of pyramid power was performed, using pyramids built to the specifications found in pyramid-power claims. Food, a ﬂower and then a razor blade were placed in the pyramid, and a control test was also conducted for the three items. There was no appreciable difference between the state of the items within and without the pyramid. Some people believe that the paranormal cannot be disproved and did not accept that the myth had been proved to be false.


I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think  of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the  preceding night. I walked with a quick pace, and  we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected,  and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might still be   there, alive, and walking about. I dreaded to  behold this monster; but I feared still more that ,  Henry should see him. Entreating him, therefore, i  to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the  _‘ I  stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand I H  was already on the lock of the door before I recollected myself.  I then paused; and a cold shivering came over me. I threw the door  ' forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a  spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but nothing  appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty; and  my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me; but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed ﬂed, I clapped my hands for joy, and ran down to Clerval.  We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possessed me; I felt my ﬂesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud. Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival; but when he observed me more attentively he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account; and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened and astonished him.

I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these people; and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain quietly in my hovel, watching, and endeavouring to discover the motives which influenced their actions. 

The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young woman arranged the cottage, and prepared the food; and the youth departed after the first meal. This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. They performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with gentleness; and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion often went apart, and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness; but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill, and delicious viands when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another's company and speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness. By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their 

experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. By great application, however, and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, fire, milk, bread, and wood. I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was father. The girl was called sister, or Agatha; and the youth Felix, brother, or son. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds, and was able to pronounce them. 

I'm terrible at waking up — I hate it. If I can get away with it, I get up at 9 o'clock. I stay in a little Holiday Inn, close to Cern at the foothills of the Jura mountains in France. They knock on the door with breakfast so I am made to get up. I get the Herald Tribune delivered and pain au chocolat and coffee. Cern is one big physics lab a 20-minute walk away, across the border into Switzerland. You can see Mont Blanc — it's absolutely beautiful and it makes my day. I've always been a scientist, always. From as far back as I can remember I wanted to do something about space exploration or astronomy. I didn't go to university until I was 22. Instead I joined a rock band called 'Dare. We made two albums and toured for a few years. Then we split up, so I rang Manchester University and said, 'Right, I want to come to uni now and do physics: It's an odd job — a fantastic job actually. Your job description is 'Find out what makes the universe tick, and here's this €6 billion machine that you can use to do it: The aim of the project is to find the origin of mass in the universe. That really means: 'Why is this table solid?' Everything indicates that when the universe began, everything was exactly like light, and it had no mass. As it expanded and cooled, something happened to cause things to get heavy. We know exactly where in time that happened, but we don't know exactly what it was that happened. The machine's been built specifically to go to that place and watch that process unfold. Lunch is at 12, and the canteen is packed with thousands of physicists, all mingling and talking about physics. What we're doing here really is as exciting as it sounds. It's exploration, just like going to the moon or Mars, or looking over the horizon to somewhere you've never seen before. The particle accelerator we're building is a massive ring with a 27-kilometre circumference, buried about 100 metres underground. It's cold inside that tube, minus 271°C, colder than space. We send proton beams around in both directions and smash them together up to 600m times a second. 


In that moment of collision — less than a billionth of a second — you get extreme conditions, like the very early universe. The area of the machine that's closest to the collisions is in an immense cavern, like a giant camera, and it takes pictures, so you can see what's happened. Someone once said it's like getting two Swiss watches and smashing them together, and then looking at the bits and trying to make out what was inside and how it works. The trick with this kind of project is to think outside the box. It's really up to you what you make of it. At the moment our knowledge stops at really simple but profound places, like: 'Why is gravity such a weak force? The whole planet is pulling this glass down, yet I can just pick it up: That's a huge mystery, and understanding it would make for a complete reassessment of how the universe works. At around 7 everyone goes out for a meal, perhaps in the village. I usually chat on the computer to my family when I get back. I can't fall asleep without reading. It doesn't do for it to be physics though, or I wouldn't go to sleep. Sunday Times Magazine 

May 2012 Felix Baumgartner, otherwise known as Fearless Felix, the 43-year-old Austrian base jumper and daredevil, is about to jump from a helium balloon 39 kilometres above a remote part of New Mexico. If he succeeds, he will become the first man to go supersonic without the help of an aeroplane. At this altitude the atmosphere is very thin and air pressure hardly exists. It is almost a vacuum, and as a result Baumgartner will be unable to correct a spin using wind resistance in the way a skydiver can at less extreme altitudes. The only way he has been able to practise is with bungee-jumps. If he survives, he will break three records in addition to becoming the first supersonic man: the highest altitude reached in a balloon, the highest skydive, and the longest freefall. Even i f his state-of-the-art pressurised suit functions and his legs stay symmetrical as he breaks the sound barrier, his concerns are far from over: his parachute might freeze; his balloon might explode; his oxygen supply might run out. When asked why anyone would want to perform such a daring feat, Baumgartner says that records are made to be broken, and that he needed a new challenge, having jumped from all of the highest buildings in the world. He also explains that the scientific purpose of the mission is to find out whether ultra-high-altitude bail-outs from spacecraft are possible. If the space shuttle Columbia had held together for 20 seconds more when it malfunctioned in 2003, it would have been at an altitude where it would have been survivable to eject. He denies being an adrenaline junkie, but admits to having wanted to become a real-life Batman since a small child, when he was always climbing trees and towers. After the balloon jump, the ex-military man — he spent five years in the Austrian army parachute display team — intends to become a fire-fighting helicopter pilot, spending half the year in the USA and half in Austria doing mountain rescue. October 2012 On the 14th of this month the 43-year-old Austrian daredevil leapt from a helium balloon 39 kilometres above the earth and into the world-record books for the first person to break the sound barrier and for the highest manned balloon flight. He reached 1357 kph and his ten-minute jump was watched by more than 8 million people on YouTube — another record, for a live news event on the website. He had to wait 12 days for the right weather conditions. He said he almost aborted his jump because his helmet visor steamed up. He was in free-fall for four minutes 20 seconds before deploying his parachute. He started by tumbling head-over-heels instead of adopting the necessary delta position with arms swept back. 

One of the most well known of all conspiracy theories — along with those concerning the assassination of U.S. President J.F. Kennedy, the death of British Princess Diana, and 9/11 — is whether there was ever a moon landing by Apollo astronauts in June 1969. As it has continued for forty years, there must be some truth behind the belief that the moon landing was a hoax staged by NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) in order to win the space race going on at the time between the USA and Russia. The claims are that evidence was manufactured, destroyed or tampered with, and that this included photos, tape recordings, rock samples, and the testimony of witnesses. The general thesis is that the landing was filmed in a studio with painted scenery and fake props. One conspiracist examined microscopically the photo of the astronauts emerging from the landing craft and said he can pinpoint where a spotlight was used to simulate sunlight, and calculated that it was between 24 and 36 centimetres to the right of the camera. It has also been cited as evidence for it being a hoax that no stars are visible though they should have been, that the background to all of the photographs is the same, and that the flag fluttered, as if in a fan breeze, despite there being no wind on the moon. There have been detailed rebuttals of the hoax allegations, but polls taken in various places have shown that between 6% and 20% even of Americans believe that the manned landings between 1969 and 1972 were faked, and major USA television networks have broadcast documentaries about the conspiracy theory. The rebuttal is founded upon the alleged existence of photos taken of the Apollo landing site showing the tracks left by the astronauts, and of the Apollo-planted stars and stripes flag still standing on the moon. But we all know that photographs can be doctored and that they prove nothing. An episode of MythBusters in August 2008 tested many of the conspiracists' claims and labelled them as being 'busted', meaning that they had been found to be untrue. But then they would, wouldn't they, since that is the purpose of the programme. 
