That’s my life The life of an innocent eleven—year—old schoolgirl!  A schoolgirl without school, without the fun and excitement of school. A child without games, without friends, without the sun, without birds, without nature, without fruit, without chocolate or sweets,  with just a little powdered milk. In short, a child without a childhood. A wartime child. I now realize that I am really living through a war,  I am witnessing an ugly, disgusting war. I and thousands of other children in this town that is being destroyed, that is crying, weeping, seeking help, but getting none. Will this ever stop, will I ever be a schoolgirl again, will I ever enjoy my childhood again? I once heard that childhood is the most wonderful time of your life. And it is.  I loved it, and now an ugly war is taking it all away from me.

There are no trees to blossom and no birds, because the war has destroyed them as well. There is no sound of birds twittering in springtime. There aren’t even any pigeons — the symbol of Sarajevo. No noisy children, no games. Even the children no longer seem like children. They’ve had their childhood taken away from them, and without that they can’t be children. It’s as if Sarajevo is slowly dying, disappearing. Life is disappearing. So how can I feel spring, when spring is something that awakens life, and here there is no life, here everything seems to have died.
Suddenly, unexpectedly, someone is using the ugly powers of war, which horrify me, to try to pull and drag me away from the shores of peace, from the happiness of wonderful friendships, playing and love.  I feel like a swimmer who was made to enter the cold water, against her will. I feel shocked, sad, unhappy and frightened and I wonder where they are forcing me to go, I wonder why they have taken away the peaceful and lovely shores of my childhood. I used to rejoice at each new day, because each was beautiful in its own way. I used to rejoice at ' the sun, at playing, at songs. In short, I enjoyed my childhood. I had no need of a better one. I have less and less strength to keep swimming in these cold waters. So take me back to the shores of my childhood, where I was warm, happy and content, like all the children whose childhood and the right to enjoy it are now being destroyed.


Nigeria We Hail Thee
Nigeria, we hail thee, 
Our own dear native land,
Though tribe and tongue may differ,
In brotherhood we stand,
Nigerians all are proud to serve
Our sovereign motherland.

When the jet sprang into the sky,
it was clear why the city
had developed the way it had,
seeing it scaled six inches to the mile.
There seemed an inevitability
about what on ground had looked haphazard, 
unplanned and without style
when the jet sprang into the sky.

When the jet reached ten thousand feet, 
it was clear why the country
had cities where rivers ran
and why the valleys were populated. 
The logic of geography — 
that land and water attracted man — 
was clearly delineated
when the jet reached ten thousand feet.

When the jet rose six miles high,
it was clear that the earth was round 
and that it had more sea than land. 
But it was difficult to understand 
that the men on the earth found 
causes to hate each other, to build 
walls across cities and to kill.
From that height, it was not clear why.

Our flag shall be a symbol, 
    That truth and justice reign, 
    In peace or battle honoured, 
    And this we count as gain, 
    To hand on to our children 
    A banner without stain.

    O God of all creation,
    Grant this our one request, 
    Help us to build a nation 
    Where no man is oppressed, 
    And so with peace and plenty 
    Nigeria may be blessed.

Arise, O Compatriots
    Arise, O compatriots,
    Nigeria's call obey
    To serve our Fatherland
    With love and strength and faith. 
    The labour of our heroes past 
    Shall never be in vain,
    To serve with heart and might
    One nation bound in freedom, peace and unity.

    O God of creation
    Direct our noble cause
    Guide our leaders right
    Help our youth the truth to know 
    In love and honesty to grow
    And living just and true
    Great lofty heights attain
    To build a nation where peace 
    And justice shall reign.

   There was a kind of sigh on the platform as if everyone
     knew what was coming. Jack's voice went up, tremulous yet 
     determined, pushing against the uncooperative silence.
       `He's like Piggy. He says things like Piggy. He isn't a proper chief.' 
       Jack clutched the conch to him.
       `He's a coward himself.'
       For a moment he paused and then went on.
       `On top, when Roger and me went on—he stayed back.' 
       `I went too!'
       `After.'
       The two boys glared at each other through screens of hair. 
       `I went on too,' said Ralph, 'then I ran away. So did you.' 
       `Call me a coward then.'
       Jack turned to the hunters.
       `He's not a hunter. He'd never have 
     got us meat. He isn't a prefect and we 
     don't know anything about him. He 
     just gives orders and expects people 
     to obey for nothing. All this talk—'
       `All this talk!' shouted Ralph.
     `Talk, talk! Who wanted it? Who 
     called the meeting?'
       Jack turned, red in the face, his 
     chin sunk back. He glowered up 
     under his eyebrows.

 `All right then,' he said in tones of deep meaning, and 
menace, 'all right.'
 He held the conch against his chest with one hand and 
stabbed the air with his index finger.
 `Who thinks Ralph oughtn't to be chief?'
 He looked expectantly at the boys ranged round, who had 
frozen. Under the palms there was deadly silence.
 `Hands up,' said Jack strongly, 'whoever wants Ralph not to 
be chief?'
 The silence continued, breathless and heavy and full of 
shame. Slowly the red drained from Jack's cheeks, then came 
back with a painful rush. He licked his lips and turned his head 
at an angle, so that his gaze avoided the embarrassment of 
linking with another's eye.
 `How many think '
 His voice tailed off. The hands that held the conch shook. He 
cleared his throat, and spoke loudly.
 `All right then.'
 He laid the conch with great care in the grass at his feet. The 
humiliating tears were running from the corner of each eye. 
 `I'm not going to play any longer. Not with you.'
 Most of the boys were looking down now, at the grass or their 
feet. Jack cleared his throat again.
 `I'm not going to be a part of Ralph's lot '
 He looked along the right-hand logs, numbering the hunters 
that had been a choir.
 `I'm going off by myself. He can get his own meat. Anyone 
who wants to hunt when I do can come too.'
 He blundered out of the triangle toward the drop to the 
white sand.
 `Jack!'
 Jack turned and looked back at Ralph. For a moment he 
paused and then cried out, high-pitched, enraged.
 ` Nor
 He leapt down from the platform and ran along the beach, 
paying no heed to the steady fall of his tears; and until he dived 
into the forest Ralph watched him.

Nothing's Changed
          Small round hard stones click 
          under my heels,
          seeding grasses thrust 
          bearded seeds
          into trouser cuffs, cans, 
          trodden on, crunch
          in tall, purple-flowering, 
          amiable weeds.

          District Six.
          No board says it is:
          but my feet know,
          and my hands,
          and the skin about my bones,
          and the soft labouring of my lungs, 
          and the hot, white, inwards turning 
          anger of my eyes.

          Brash with glass,
          name flaring like a flag, 
          it squats
          in the grass and weeds, 
          incipient Port Jackson trees: 
          new, up-market, haute cuisine, 
          guard at the gatepost,
          whites only inn.

          No sign says it is:
          but we know where we belong.

          I press my nose
          to the clear panes, know, 
          before I see them, there will be 
          crushed ice white glass,
          linen falls,
          the single rose.

          Down the road, 
          working man's cafe sells
 			bunny chows.
                      Take it with you, eat
                      it at a plastic table's top,
                      wipe your fingers on your jeans,
                      spit a little on the floor:
                      it's in the bone.

                      I back from the
                      glass,
                      boy again,
                      leaving small mean 0 
                      of small mean mouth. 
                      Hands burn
                      for a stone, a bomb,
                      to shiver down the glass. 
                      Nothing's changed.

In this scene from Act III of Shakespeare's play Romeo and Juliet, the feud 
between the two leading families of Verona in Italy comes to a head when 
Romeo and his friend Mercutio, who are Montagues, fight and kill the 
leading young Capulet, who is Romeo's relative now that he has just secretly 
married Juliet.



                                                           Enter ROMEO.
          TYBALT          Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.
          MERCUTIO        But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
                          Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower; 
                          Your worship in that sense may call him 'man'.
          TYBALT          Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford         5 
                          No better term than this: thou art a villain.
          ROMEO           Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
                          Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
                          To such a greeting. Villain am I none;
                          Therefore farewell, I see thou knowest me not. 10
          TYBALT          Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
                          That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw. 
          ROMEO           I do protest I never injured thee,
                          But love thee better than thou canst devise,
                          Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;    15
                          And so, good Capulet, which name I tender
                          As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
          MERCUTIO        0 calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
                          `Alla stoccata' carries it away. [Draws his sword]
                          Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?        20
          TYBALT          What wouldst thou have with me?


            MERCUTIO          Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your 
                                    1  I nine ayes that mean to make bold withal, and 
                              as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest
                              of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of     25 
                              his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be
                              about your ears ere it be out.
            TYBALT            I am for you. [Drawing his sword]
            ROMEO             Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
            MERCUTIO          Come, sir, your `passado'. [They fight.]           30
            ROMEO             Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
                              Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage!
                              Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
                              Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
                              [Romeo steps between them.]
                              Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!                       35
                              [Tybalt under Romeo's arm stabs Mercutio and flies 
                              with his followers]
            MERCUTIO                        I am hurt.
                              A plague a' both houses! I am sped.
                              Is he gone and hath nothing?
            BENVOLIO                               What, art thou hurt?
            MERCUTIO          Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch, marry, `tis enough.  40
                              Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon. 
                              [Exit Page]
            ROMEO             Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.
            MERCUTIO          No, `tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
                              church-door; but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask
                              for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave     45 
                              man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world.
                              A plague a' both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, 
                              a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! 
                              a braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the
                              book of arithmetic. Why the devil came you         50 
                              between us? I was hurt under your arm.
            ROMEO             I thought all for the best.
            MERCUTIO          Help me into some house, Benvolio,
                              Or I shall faint. A plague a' both your houses!
                              They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,       55
                              And soundly too. Your houses!
                              Exit [with Benvolio]
            ROMEO             This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
                              My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
                              In my behalf; my reputation stained
                              With Tybalt's slander — Tybalt, that an hour 

 Hath been my cousin! 0 sweet Juliet, 



            Thy beauty hath made me effeminate, 
             / beauty


            And in my temper softened valour's steel! 



            [Enter Benvolio]



BENVOLIO    0 Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead.



            That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds, 



            Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.



ROMEO       This day's black fate on more days doth depend; 



            This but begins the woe others must end.



            [Enter Tybalt]



BENVOLIO    Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.



ROMEO       Again, in triumph! and Mercutio slain?



            Away to heaven, respective lenity,



            And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now! 



            Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again 



            That late thou gayest me; for Mercutio's soul



            Is but a little way above our heads, 



            Staying for thine to keep him company:



            Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.



TYBALT      Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here, 



            Shalt with him hence.



ROMEO                This shall determine that.




            [They fight; Tybalt falls]



BENVOLIO    Romeo, away, be gone!



            The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.



            Stand not amazed, the Prince will doom thee death, 



            If thou art taken. Hence be gone, away!

