
One creature’s rubbish is another’s treasure. Nature has its own way of cleaning up — seagulls, cockroaches, rodents and ﬂies carry off their spoil, and scavenging bacteria slowly break down even the hardest plastics. Human beings, unfortunately, are less dedicated to clearing up their waste.
Excessive consumption and rampant greed have caused the meaningless acquisitiveness of modern societies world-wide, and insufﬁcient provision is made for what we do with the old and the empty. Fly-tipping is on the increase. Lorries drive at dead of night to abandoned industrial sites and remote beauty spots to dump mounds of rotting vegetables and builders’ rubble rather than spend time and money on recycling it. Even more worryingly, chemical and medical waste is also being made to  vanish in this way.

A rubbish dump twice the size of the United States has been discovered ﬂoating in the Pacific Ocean. It stretches from  500 nautical miles off the Californian  coast, across the northern Paciﬁc, past  Hawaii and almost as far as Japan. The vast  expanse of debris, made up of plastic junk  including footballs, kayaks, Lego blocks and  carrier bags, is kept together by swirling underwater currents. It takes a yacht a week to sail through it. Because the rubbish is translucent and lies just below the water’s  surface, it cannot be seen in satellite photographs. Cruise ships use the Caribbean as a rubbish bin.


Around a ﬁfth of seajunk is thrown off ships or oil platforms — the rest comes from the land. The rubbish island could double in size over the next decade if consumers do not cut back on their use of plastics. More than a million seabirds and 100,000 marine mammals die every year as a result of plastic pollution. Syringes, cigarette lighters and toothbrushes have all been found inside the  stomachs of dead seabirds. This rubbish can  also be dangerous for humans, because tiny  plastic pellets in the sea can attract man-made  chemicals which then enter the food chain when ﬁsh eat them. What goes into the ocean ends up on our dinner plate.

A cause for concern and anxiety has emerged with the advent and prevalence of the internet, cell phones and texting. The internet has exposed our children to a potentially sinister world, making them  ‘ even more vulnerable and accessible to strangers than ever before. Even the kids who aren’t looking for trouble ﬁnd trouble looking for them on the World Wide Web. Without proper supervision and even censorship, the threats to teens are huge and ever increasing.

Often parents have no idea what their children are doing with their phones and computers in their bedrooms, because they spend no time with their children, are too busy using the same technology themselves, or have no idea how it works, what is out there in cyberland, and what it can lead to. Kids do not volunteer to tell their parents whom they are chatting to on the internet, so unless you ask you will never know.

It is a parent’s job to ensure the safety of their children, and with the rapid advances in information and communications technology, the only way this can be achieved is with vigilance. You need to know which pictures they are uploading for the world to View, and what they themselves are viewing. Explain to your teens, and pre—teens, the dangers of providing personal information, either by instant message or as a post, to a favourite l social networking site. A large majority of teenagers have created online proﬁles including photos of themselves. It is also common for them to post a picture of someone else which has caused the other person embarrassment, but which the victim is unable to remove and which may be used by others with dubious intent.

Children and teenagers Like their food and drink fizzy, sweet and brightly coloured - and they want it now, now, now. They are notoriously reluctant to eat fresh fruit and vegetables - or indeed vegetables of any kind. Fizzy fruit was an experiment tried out a decade ago to try to tempt youngsters to eat fruit, but the carbon dioxide gas infused into it soon went out again, and the concept never caught on. A bright-orange drink aimed at young children, which made itself out to be no less than a health drink, lost its market when it emerged that the chemicals used to colour it were turning children yellow. Other tricks to overcome unwillingness to consume fresh produce have included 'snack-flavoured' vegetables, such as chocolate-flavoured carrots, baked-bean flavoured peas, and Brussels sprouts tasting of bubble gum!
The most consistent feature of the modern teenage diet is that it often consists largely or entirely of junk food, otherwise known as fast food. This has brought about international concern on many levels, from the personal. to the political,

from weight gain to global land use. The demands of in the street or in a vehicle - and even bought in
international fast-food chains involve an ecologically drive-through restaurants - and more often than not
damaging process which starts with deforestation by someone eating alone.
and erosion in rural areas and ends with littering and Which brings up the question ofwhatis in the fast 1
packaging pollution on city streets. food. There have been numerous scares and scandals f;

There are campaigns to bring back slow food, in various countries about what manufacturers
traditional home-cooked dishes which take time to actually put in take-away meals and supermarket
prepare and to cook - and to eat; such food was packets. The contents do not always match what
designed to be consumed in company, with the time it says on the tin, box or wrapper. This may be the
to appreciate it, and the leisure to catch up with result of deliberate deceit, because it was cheaper
friends and family. Not the least of the arguments or easier to use another ingredient, or of accidental
against fast food is that this form of nutrition - negligence which allowed something unhealthy or
which is far from nutritious - makes us more rushed, even poisonous to get into the production process. 5
more stressed and more isolated. This is because it The cost to the company is then very serious, and
can be eaten quickly, often actually on the move for the victims it may be even worse
M You are going to look closely at the grammatical structures and stylistic


At the risk of stating the obvious, raising teenagers isn't an easy job. The teenage years may be stressful and characterised by a considerable amount of screaming, crying, whining, and countless threats of running away from home — and that's just the parents. The teenagers generally engage in all of these attractive habits too, as they try to become independent creatures, straining on the leash of parental control, while parents try to cling on in order to protect their children, reluctant to let go and accept that their child is growing up. Here are some tips for gaining respect and acceptance when dealing with teenage children: • Don't make a fuss about nothing: if you do, your teen will not listen when it comes to the serious stuff. He or she will perfect the art of tuning you out if you relentlessly lecture them or punish them for trivial infractions. They are not interested in what is illegal, immoral, or even what is detrimental to their well-being, so it can be an uphill struggle to get them to take anything seriously. • Offer options: doing deals alleviates the impression that you are controlling and that your teen is being controlled. Everyone needs  to believe they have a choice and can make their own decisions — even if the right answer is inescapable. You have to allow them to feel they have some autonomy. • Listen: you can't expect to be listened to if you discount their feelings and arguments with-out even considering them. You may not agree, but you should at least let them finish a sentence, and let them present their case before you dismiss it, to show that you are interested in their point of view and respect their judgement. 

Practise what you preach: if you are doing the opposite of what you are asking them to l

i do, such as telling lies and being irresponsible, then you haven’t got a leg to stand on. 5
i Teens emulate the people they respect and they need role models. You must admit your

i own failings rather than pretend you don’t have any. They need to know that you are i

i human too. i

i 0 Give reasons: always explain why they have to do something, rather than making

it a case of ‘Because I say so ’. If they can see the logic behind your request then they l 2"

ought to be more willing to do it.

2 0 Deal with problems head on: there’s no point tiptoeing around important issues.

f Be direct and open. Sugar-coating gives the impression you are afraid of tackling
i something and they will lose confidence in you, and may turn to someone else, i
someone less appropriate, for help. i
i I 0 Stay involved: it’s easy to switch off or keep your distance when you are disappointed, i
5 but teens need your support to help them withstand the enormous pressure from their
i peers. If you become remote your teen will feel alone, frightened and betrayed. If they i

l are finding life difficult, they need your advice, even if they tell you the exact opposite, [ p
l and you ought to be available for them. i
i 0 Enforce rules and discipline: if you don’t lay down the law and teach your teen i

i what the limits are, who will? They will always push to see how far they can go, and i

i whether there are consequences to crossing the line. You mg respond surely and l

l swiftly when they need to be punished, because otherwise someone ‘else in authority 1

i might be forced to do your job, like the headteacher or the police, and that could have l

I disastrous and lasting effects well into adulthood.
networking sites is unsafe. They are wrong. Once their contact details are in the system they can be bullied, harassed or stalked. Twenty percent of teenagers have suffered from this. The data can be used to locate your child and to discover their regular routes and scheduled activities. Later, when they apply for a job, they must expect prospective employers to do a search to see what kind of pictures they have posted and what kind of comments they have made. What's done cannot be undone; even if it was done a long time ago, it is still used to judge suitability. There have been many cases of people losing their jobs because of the posting of inappropriate pictures of themselves or making unfortunate comments for all the world to see. 
The Planners They plan. They build. All spaces are gridded, filled with permutations of possibilities. The buildings are in alignment with the roads which meet at desired points linked by bridges all hang in the grace of mathematics. They build and will not stop. Even the sea draws back and the skies surrender. 
They erase the flaws, the blemishes of the past, knock off useless blocks with dental dexterity. All gaps are plugged 

with gleaming gold. The country wears perfect rows of shining teeth. Anaesthesia, amnesia, hypnosis. They have the means. They have it all so it will not hurt, so history is new again. The piling will not stop. The drilling goes right through the fossils of last century. 
But my heart would not bleed poetry. Not a single drop to stain the blueprint of our past's tomorrow 

Living off other people — Welfare It would be pretty to have roses Flourishing by my back door. It would be nice to have a well-kept house With velvet chairs not scraping a polished floor. It would be lovely to sit down at dinner Grey tie, pearl pin, fresh shirt and well-kept hands And good to have a purring car in a clean garage Eye-catching as the best brass bands. 
But to keep it all going would be a lot of worry And anyone who does it has to race and scurry Seeing to roofs and pruning, maintenance and mechanics, A shower of rain, a little green fly, bring on terrible panics And ruin and failure shadow every path. 
So I think this is the best thing to do: As I walk down roads I see so many flowers Nod-nodding in all the gardens that I pass. I can glance into other people's rooms that they have furnished And look how courteously that man is turning To open the front door to his gleaming house. Did you see how his suit fitted him, his perfect cuffs? Spotless cars Slide by with women in furs and perfumes Wafted to me with the flavour of cigars. 
I am wrapped in my layers of shapeless coats And I need never polish or dig or set The table out for four distinguished guests Or get to an office or prove myself each day To provide for hammocks and lawns, To get my antiques protected against insects. A guest everywhere, I look in as dinner is served. As I tramp past others' gardens, the rose opens.   
