
A thief only needs a moment to make off  your valuables. Your coat hung up ina restaurant, your bag beside your Chair, your mobile phone on the table while you pay the bill all are vulnerable if you look away for a Second; S0 try to be careful at all times. The same is true of your wallet or purse. Pickpockets often work in teams — While one distracts you, the other is picking your pocket. If someone bumps into you, check that you still have your money. Cafes, public transport and shopping areas are the places where most thefts occur. Cash is a favourite target for thieves. So always try to avoid carrying large amounts of it. Always memorise your PIN number  for your cash dispensing cards; do not carry it with you and never disclose it to anyone. Leaving cash on View anywhere is an open invitation. Someone could reach through a car window to take it, or steal it from your desk, or snatch it from your hand.  Bicycles are stolen by the millions every year. They are a popular target for thieves because they can easily be sold. Sometimes thieves collect a whole vanload of bicycles. They should be locked whenever they are left on the street, even if you are just popping into a shop very briefly. Mark the frame with your name or postcode. It will help the police return it to you if it is recovered — they have thousands of unclaimed, unidentifiable bicycles. The best kind of bicycle lock is made of a loop of solid metal. Chains deter casual thieves, but can be easily cut with the right equipment. Always lock your bicycle to something immovable, like a railing.  Eight out of ten burglaries occur when a house or ﬂat is empty.  So don’t advertise your absence when you are on holiday or out  shopping. Fit time switches to turn your house lights on after dark.  Don’t leave valuable items, such as DVDs and laptops, visible through  the window Doors need the strongest possible locks, and windows  can also be made more secure with a lock requiring a key.

Mma Ramotswe had a detective agency in Africa, at the foot of Kgale
Hill. These were its assets: a tiny white van, two desks, two chairs, a
telephone, and an old typewriter. Then there was a teapot, in which
Mma Ramotswe - the only lady private detective in Botswana
brewed redbush tea. And three mugs - one for herself, one for her
secretary, and one for the client. What else does a detective agency
really need? Detective agencies rely on human intuition and
intelligence, both of which Mma Ramotswe had in abundance. No
inventory would ever include those, of course.
But there was also the view, which again could appear on
no inventory. How could any such list describe what one saw
when one looked out from Mma Ramotswe’s door? To the front,
an acacia tree, the thorn tree which dots the wide edges of the
Kalahari; the great white thorns, a warning; the olive-grey leaves,
by contrast, so delicate. In its branches, in the late afternoon, or
in the cool of the early morning, one might see a Go-Away Bird,
or hear it, rather. And beyond the acacia, over the dusty road, the
roofs of the town under a cover of trees and scrub bush; on the
horizon, in a blue shimmer of heat, the hills, like improbable,
overgrown termite-mounds.
Everybody called her Mma Ramotswe, although if people had
wanted to be formal, they would have addressed her as Mme
Mma Ramotswe. This is the right thing for a person of stature,
but which she had never used of herself. So it was always Mma
Ramotswe, rather than Precious Ramotswe, a name which very
few people employed.
She was a good detective, and a good woman. A good woman
in a good country, one might say. She loved her country, Botswana,
which is a place of peace, and she loved Africa, for all its trials.

I am not ashamed to be called an African patriot, said Mma
Ramotswe. I love all the people whom God made, but I especially
know how to love the people who live in this place. They are my
people, my brothers and sisters. It is my duty to help them to
solve the mysteries in their lives. That is what I am called to do.

In idle moments, when there were no pressing matters to be
dealt with, and when everybody seemed to be sleepy from the
heat, she would sit under her acacia tree. It was a dusty place to
sit, and the chickens would occasionally come and peck about her
feet, but it was a place which seemed to encourage thought. It was
here that Mma Ramotswe would contemplate some of the issues
which, in everyday life, may so easily be pushed to one side.

Everything, thought Mma Ramotswe, has been something
before. Here I am, the only lady private detective in the whole of
Botswana, sitting in front of my detective agency. But only a few
years ago there was no detective agency, and before that, before
there were even any buildings here, there were just the acacia
trees, and the river-bed in the distance, and the Kalahari over
there, so close.

In those days there was no Botswana even, just the
Bechuanaland Protectorate, and before that again there was
Khama’s Country, and lions with the dry wind in their manes.

But look at it now: a detective agency, right here in Gaborone,
with me, the fat lady detective, sitting outside and thinking these
thoughts about how what is one thing today becomes quite
another thing tomorrow.

Mma Ramotswe set up the No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency with
the proceeds of the sale of her father’s cattle. He had owned a
big herd, and had no other children; so every single beast, all one

hundred and eighty of them, including the white Brahmin bulls
whose grandparents he had bred himself, went to her. The cattle
were moved from the cattle post, back to Mochudi where they
waited, in the dust, under the eyes of the chattering herd boys,
until the livestock agent came.

They fetched a good price, as there had been heavy rains that
year, and the grass had been lush. Had it been the year before,
when most of that southern part of Africa had been racked by
drought, it would have been a different matter. People had dithered
then, wanting to hold on to their cattle, as without your cattle you
were naked; others, feeling more desperate, sold, because the rains
had failed year after year and they had seen the animals become
thinner and thinner. Mma Ramotswe was pleased that her father’s
illness had prevented his making any decision, as now the price
had gone up and those who had held on were well rewarded.

‘I want you to have your own business, ’ he said to her on his
death bed. ‘You’ll get a good price for the cattle now. Sell them
and buy a business. A butchery maybe. Whatever you like.’

She held her father’s hand and looked into the eyes of the man
she loved beyond all others, her Daddy, her wise Daddy, whose
lungs had been filled with dust in those mines and who had
scrimped and saved to make life good for her.

It was difficult to talk through her tears, but she managed to
say: ‘I’m going to set up a detective agency. Down in Gaborone. It
will be the best one in Botswana. The No. 1 Agency.’

For a moment her father’s eyes opened wide and it seemed as if
he was struggling to speak.

‘But... but...’

But he died before he could say anything more, and Mma
Ramotswe fell on his chest and wept for all the dignity, love and
suffering that died with him.

She had a sign painted in bright colours, which was then set up just
off the Lobatse Road, on the edge of town, pointing to the small
building she had purchased: THE NO. 1 LADIES’ DETECTIVE
AGENCY. FOR ALL CONFIDENTIAL MATTERS AND ENQUIRIES.
SATISFACTION GUARANTEED FOR ALL PARTlES. UNDER
PERSONAL MANAGEMENT.

After a slow start, she was rather surprised to find that her
services were in considerable demand. She was consulted about
missing husbands, about the creditworthiness of potential
business partners, and about suspected fraud by employees. In
almost every case, she was able to come up with at least some
information for the client; when she could not, she waived her
fee, which meant that virtually nobody who consulted her was
dissatisfied. People in Botswana liked to talk, she discovered,

and the mere mention of the fact that she was a private detective
would let loose a positive outpouring of information on all
sorts of subjects. It flattered people, she concluded, to be

approached by a private detective, and this effectively loosened
their tongues.

He may not look much of a superhero the car suspended two metres above the ground
Hin his blue tights, but a masked until the bemused owner came back to claim it.
Czech vigilante who fights antisocial Other footage shows Super Vaclav following
behaviour has found fame after posting videos people who have dropped litter to make them
of his stunts on YouTube. return and put it in the bin.

The self-styled saviour goes by the name of There is also film of him blocking the
Super Vaclav and hides his real identity in a traffic on one of Prague’s busiest roads with
mock Superman costume complete with a blue a large banner urging motorists to protect
cape, a mask, a white ski helmet and black the environment by walking or cycling to
jump boots. work instead.

Somewhat overweight and pushing 40, Super Vaclav said his deeds were intended
Super Vaclav has become the scourge of Prague’s to inspire his fellow citizens to civic action. ‘I
drug dealers, dog foulers and inconsiderate think something is foul in this country and I’m
drivers. Indeed, he targets almost anyone he frustrated because nobody will do anything
regards as a nuisance, including illicit smokers, about it. We’re all passive and seem completely
graffiti artists and residents who refuse to  be it about politics or anything else,’
recycle their rubbish. he said. ‘I had no other choice but to put

Videos of his feats include one showing him on a costume. I believe our country needs a
using a forklift truck to lift a Mini that has been superhero.’
wrongly parked in a disabled parking bay. He left Bojan Pancevski, Sunday Times

Next day T. astonished them all. He was late at the rendezvous,
and the voting for that day’s exploit took place without him. At
Blackie’s suggestion the gang was to disperse in pairs, take buses
at random, and see how many free rides could be snatched from
unwary conductors (the operation was to be carried out in pairs
to avoid cheating). They were drawing lots for their companions
when T. arrived.

‘Where you been, T? ’ Blackie asked. ‘You can’t vote now. You
know the rules. ’

‘I’ve been there, ’ T. said. He looked at the ground, as though
he had thoughts to hide.

‘Where?’

‘At Old Misery’s.’

‘At Old Misery’s?’ Blackie said. There was nothing in the
rules against it, but he had a sensation that T. was treading on
dangerous ground. He asked hopefully, ‘Did you break in? ’

‘And pinch things? ’ somebody asked.
Blackie said, ‘Nobody’s going to pinch things. Breaking in
that’s good enough, isn’t it? We don’t want any court stuff.’

‘I don’t want to pinch anything,’ T. said. ‘I’ve got a better idea.’

‘What is it? ’

T. raised his eyes, as grey and disturbed as the drab August
day. ‘We’ll pull it down,’ he said. ‘We’ll destroy it.’

Blackie gave a single hoot of laughter and then fell quiet,
daunted by the serious implacable gaze.

‘What’d the police be doing all the time? ’ he said.

‘They’d never know We’d do it from inside. I’ve found a
way in. ’ He said with a sort of intensity, ‘We’d be like worms,
don’t you see, in an apple. When we came out again there’d be
nothing there, no staircase, no panels, nothing but just walls,
and then we’d make the walls fall down - somehow.’

‘We’d go to prison, ’ Blackie said.

‘Who’s to prove? And anyway we wouldn’t have pinched
anything.’ He added without the smallest flicker of glee, ‘There
wouldn’t be anything to pinch after we’d finished. ’

‘There wouldn’t be time, ’ Blackie said. ‘ I've seen
housebreakers at work. ’

‘There are twelve of us, ’ T. said. ‘We’d organise. ’

‘None of us know how -’

‘I know,’ T. said. He looked across at Blackie. ‘Have you got a
better plan?’

‘The gang’s got to vote.’

‘Put it up then.’

Blackie said uneasily, ‘It’s proposed that tomorrow and
Monday we destroy Old Misery’s house.

‘Who’s in favour?’

T. said, ‘It’s carried.’

It was the end of Blackie’s leadership. He went away to the
back of the car-park and began to kick a stone, dribbling it this
way and that. Beyond, paying no more attention to him than to
a stranger, the gang had gathered round T.

For Swami events took an unexpected
the newspaper he was reading under
‘Swami, listen to this: “News is to ban
lad who, while returning home by the
face with a tiger The paragraph 
had with the tiger and his flight up a
l for half a day till some people came

that way and killed the tiger.

After reading it through, Father
looked at Swami fixedly and asked,
‘What do you say to that?’

Swami said, ‘I think he must have
been a very strong and grown-up
person, not at all a boy. How could a
boy fight a tiger? ’

‘You think you are wiser than the
newspaper?’ Father sneered. ‘A man
may have the strength of an elephant
and yet be a coward: whereas another
may have the strength of a straw, but
if he has courage he can do anything.

Courage is everything, strength and
age are not important. ’

Swami disputed the theory. ‘How
can it be, Father? Suppose I have all
the courage, what can I do if a tiger
should attack me? ’

‘Leave alone strength, can you prove you have courage? Let
me see if you can sleep alone tonight in my office room. ’

A frightful proposition, Swami thought. He had always
slept beside his granny in the passage, and any change in this
arrangement kept him trembling and awake all night. He hoped
at first that his father was only joking. He mumbled weakly,
‘Yes,’ and tried to change the subject; he said very loudly and
with a great deal of enthusiasm, ‘We are going to admit even
elders in our cricket club hereafter. We are buying brand-new
bats and balls. Our captain has asked me to tell you

‘We’ll see about it later,’ Father cut in. ‘You must sleep alone
hereafter. ’ Swami realized that the matter had gone beyond his

f control: from a challenge it had become a plain command; he
knew his father’s tenacity at such moments.

‘From the first of next month I’ll sleep alone, Father. ’

‘No, you must do it now. It is disgraceful sleeping beside granny
or mother like a baby. You are in the second form and I don’t at all
like the way you are being brought up, ’ he said, and looked at his
wife, who was rocking the cradle. ‘Why do you look at me while
you say it?’ she asked. ‘I hardly know anything about the boy. ’

‘No, no, I don’t mean you,’ Father said.

‘If you mean that your mother is spoiling him, tell her so; and
don’t look at me,’ she said, and turned away.

Swami’s father sat gloomily gazing at the newspaper on his
lap. Swami rose silently and tiptoed away to his bed in the
passage. Granny was sitting up in her bed, and remarked, ‘Boy,
are you already feeling sleepy? Don’t you want a story? ’ Swami
made wild gesticulations to silence his granny, but that good
lady saw nothing. So Swami threw himself on his bed and
pulled the blanket over his face.

Granny said, ‘Don’t cover your face. Are you really very
sleepy? ’ Swami leant over and whispered, ‘Please, please, shut
up, granny. Don’t talk to me, and don’t let anyone call me even if
the house is on fire. If I don’t sleep at once I shall perhaps die
He turned over, curled, and snored under the blanket till he
found his blanket pulled away.

Presently Father came and stood over him. ‘Swami, get up,’
he said. He looked like an apparition in the semi-darkness
of the passage, which was lit by a cone of light from the hall.
Swami stirred and groaned as if in sleep. Father said, ‘Get up,
Swami.’ Granny pleaded, ‘Why do you disturb him? ’

‘Get up, Swami,’ he said for the fourth time, and Swami got up.
Father rolled up his bed, took it under his arm, and said, ‘Come
with me.’ Swami looked at his granny, hesitated for a moment,

and followed his father into the office room. On the way he three
a look of appeal at his mother and she said, ‘Why do you take him
to the office room? He can sleep in the hall, I think.’

‘I don’t think so,’ Father said, and Swami slunk behind him
with bowed head.

‘Let me sleep in the hall, Father,’ Swami pleaded. ‘Your office
room is very dusty and there may be scorpions behind your
law books.’

‘There are no scorpions, little fellow Sleep on the bench if
you like.’


‘No. You must learn not to be afraid of darkness. It is only a

question of habit. You must cultivate good habits.’

‘Will you at least leave the door open? ’

‘All right. But promise you will not roll up your bed and
go to your granny’s side at night. If you do it, mind you, I will
make you the laughing-stock of your school. ’

Swami felt cut off from humanity. He was pained and
angry He didn’t like the strain of cruelty he saw in his father’s
nature. He hated the newspaper for printing the tiger’s story
He Wished that the tiger hadn’t spared the boy, who didn’t
appear to be a boy after all, but a monster

As the night advanced and the silence in the house
deepened, his heart beat faster. A ray of light from the street
lamp strayed in and cast shadows on the wall. Through the
stillness all kinds of noises reached his ears - the ticking of
the clock, rustle of trees, snoring sounds, and some vague
night insects humming.

Swami hurriedly got up and spread his bed under the
bench and crouched there. It seemed to be a much safer
place, more compact and reassuring. He shut his eyes
tight and encased himself in his blanket once again and
unknown to himself fell asleep, and in sleep was racked with

nightmares. A tiger was chasing him. His feet stuck to the
ground. He desperately tried to escape but his feet would
not move; the tiger was at his back, and he could hear its
claws scratch the ground scratch, scratch, and then a light
thud Swami tried to open his eyes, but his eyelids would
not open and the nightmare continued. It threatened to
continue forever. Swami groaned in despair.
With a desperate effort he opened his eyes. He put his hand
out to feel his granny’s presence at his side, as was his habit,
but he only touched the wooden leg of the bench. And his
lonely state came back to him. He sweated with fright. And

now what was this rustling? He moved to the edge of the bench
and stared into the darkness. Something was moving down. He
lay gazing at it in horror. His end had come. As it came nearer he
crawled out from under the bench, hugged it with all his might,
and used his teeth on it like a mortal weapon
‘Aiyo! Something has bitten me,’ went forth an agonized,
thundering cry and was followed by a heavy tumbling and
falling amidst furniture.
In a moment Father, cook, and a servant came in,
carrying light.
And all three of them fell on the burglar who lay amidst the
furniture with a bleeding ankle
Congratulations were showered on Swami next day. His
classmates looked at him with respect, and his teacher patted his
back. The headmaster said that he was a true scout. Swami had
bitten into the flesh of one of the most notorious house-breakers
of the district and the police were grateful to him for it.

The Inspector said, ‘Why don’t you join the police when you
are grown up? ’

Swami said for the sake of politeness, ‘Certainly, yes, ’ though
he had quite made up his mind to be an engine driver, a railway
guard, or a bus conductor later in life.

When he returned home from the club that night, Father
asked, ‘Where is the boy? ’

‘He is asleep. ’

‘Already!’

‘He didn’t have a wink of sleep the whole of last night,’ said
his mother.

‘Where is he sleeping? ’

‘In his usual place, ’ Mother said casually. ‘He went to bed at
seven-thirty. ’

‘Sleeping beside his granny again! ’ Father said. ‘No wonder he
wanted to be asleep before I could return home - clever boy!’

Mother lost her temper. ‘You let him sleep where he likes.
You needn’t risk his life again

Father mumbled as he went in to change: ‘All right, mollycoddle and spoil him as much as you like. Only don’t blame me
afterwards

Swami, following the whole conversation from under the

blanket, felt tremendously relieved to hear that his father was

giving him up.
She saw the mini-bus pass the kitchen window before pulling
up on the gravel driveway to the side of the house. It looked
like a tradesman’s van, with metal panels where the windows
would normally be, and ladders strapped to the roof racks. But
there was no company name on the side of the van, and she felt
her stomach tighten at 
Two wore clean, neat, blue overalls with official insignia on
the pockets. The third man, who had knocked at the door, had
a lighter build. He wore a conservative two-piece suit and was
approaching middle age. There was a professional, competent
air about him. He looked thoroughly respectable.

‘Yes? ’ she asked.

‘Morning, madam,’ he replied affably. ‘This is a robbery. ’

Inside the house, she led them to the lounge. They followed
politely, conscious of their movements.

‘We had a team through only two weeks ago, ’ she
complained.

“Not one of ours, madam. I’m afraid we can’t cooperate with
the other firms. Competition, you know. You can always put in a
complaint. ’

‘Well, where do you want to start? ’

‘We’d like to put you in the picture first, ’ replied the leader,
taking a small notebook from his suit pocket. ‘We like our
customers to know they are dealing with professional people,
so I’ll just run through the basics. ’ He flipped through the
alphabetical tabs on the side of the book, opened to a page
covered in neat, pencilled notes and diagrams. He read from
it in a confirmatory tone, pausing now and then to check that
she understood the details and was happy, ‘Mrs Morrison,

42 Wentworth She nodded; he went on. ‘Now, we’ve
disconnected your phone at the junction on the corner, and

we have a man in the street with a second vehicle just to make
sure we won’t be surprised by anything unexpected. ’ He gave

a small, proud smile. ‘We disconnected your power on arrival,
and of course we’ll put that back on as we leave. We know how
inconvenient it is to have freezers defrost and so on. The phone,
however, is your responsibility as always. We know that your
daughter is at work and won’t be back until four at the earliest.
We also know that she usually telephones you at eleven, so that
it will be he checked his watch, briskly, two and a half
hours before she notices the disconnection. Plenty of time. We
have, of course, checked out your deliveries, none of which are
due this morning.’ He paused before flipping the notebook shut.

‘Yes,’ she said politely. ‘You seem very thorough. You must
have spent some time checking. ’

‘Two weeks is our normal time frame, ’ he said, finally closing
the pad. ‘A bit unfortunate for you really that we didn’t see the
other firm come through. It must have been a little over two
weeks ago that they called.’

‘Yes.’
The next was asked a little anxiously, as though the wrong
answer might introduce a note of unpleasantness. ‘Did they
leave much?’

‘Uh, no. They took the lot. But we got the insurance people
right away so we’ve been able to replace most of it.’

The man was clearly relieved. ‘Oh good. We hate having to
extract a forfeit. ’

‘What is it at the moment?’

‘Windows this month,’ he replied, signalling to one of the
other two men, who had been standing patiently by the window.
‘Of course, we break them from the inside so as not to get glass

on the furnishings. Well then! We’d better get to work.’

Presently, all three men returned to the lounge. Disregarding
her for the moment, the leader spoke to his men. ‘Bring the stuff
here and we’ll make up the inventory as we load it into the van.
It’ll be more efficient that way. ’

The two accomplices nodded and set to work. A small pile of
goods began to build near the entrance hall. Television set; DVD
recorder; kitchen appliances; some jewellery It didn’t take long.

He turned to the woman. ‘Will you accompany me on
the inspection? We won’t entertain claims unless they are
notified immediately. ’

Reluctantly she followed him from room to room, casting
a sad glance at the stack of appliances on the floor. She had to
admit that it was a very professional job. Except for the goods
they had taken, everything was in its place. Despite herself, she

had to remark on the fact.

‘Well, we do have standards to maintain,’ said the man.
‘People still remember the old days - a brick through the
window, contents strewn about. Mainly it was kids back then,
amateurs. People felt as if their homes had been violated, as if
they weren’t safe any more. But things have changed so much
since the new legislation. We have to be accredited, audited. It
puts the operation on a whole new level. ’

‘Even so,’ she replied. ‘I think we’d be better off without
Look, you’ve done a very good job, and you’ve a right to be
proud of it, but I just don’t see that it’s really necessary. ’

‘You’re talking about jobs, madam, people’s livelihood.

The country couldn’t handle the unemployment. Nationalising
robbery was the best thing the government could do in
the circumstances. ’

It took only a few minutes for them to transfer the haul
to the van. They left her with a copy of the list for insurance
purposes. She was only half way through checking it when a car


