What good is Art? This question is usually asked by tax-payers who don’t think the state should ‘waste’ money  on it, by parents who don’t want their children to become artists because they don’t see it as  a secure career, or by governments who think universities should focus on science, maths and other ‘useful ’ subjects which will beneﬁt industry and the economy.  But did anyone ever ask what the work of Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci was good for? Our opinions about the need for the existence of art may have changed over the centuries. Those who defend it argue that Art (with a capital A) needs to exist because it makes people see, makes people think, or makes people happy.  But more to the point, what is good art? Where do we draw the line between art and non—art, and between good and bad art? And who decides? What kinds of creativity should be termed art? And what is the difference between an art and a craft? Who is worthy of being called an artist? And can it be a Child or a monkey? If art is used as advertising, for example on a box of chocolates or biscuits, does that demean it? And are the ridiculously high prices paid for a painting remotely justiﬁable? And should the  public be denied access to national treasures  kept hidden in exclusive private collections?   And is abstract art as clever as representational art? One could go on and on asking questions  about art, or Art.


 The Mexican government has paid an artist to make 8,000 statues — all to be dumped  on the sea bed. Why? In an attempt to save an endangered coral reef off the coast at Cancun, which suffers from repeated attack by hurricanes and is therefore at risk and needs protecting from anything which may further damage it. The statues of human ﬁgures now form the world’s largest underwater sculpture  display, 10 metres below the sea surface, which , can be seen from boats passing above it. The H statues are made from a specially hard and non—toxic form of clay. The ﬁrst statues were lowered in 2006 and the site was declared open in 2009. The statues show human forms engaged in day-to—day activities, such as watching TV and driving a car. After being lowered to the sea bed, they are covered with coral to encourage growth. The aim is to tempt divers away from the MesoAmerican 0r Manchones reef, the second longest coral chain in the world, to prevent further destruction to its delicate environment.  There are now 500 statues, created and sunk over a period of 7 years by 38-year—old jason deCaires Taylor, a British-Guyanese artist. It has been rated by National Geographic magazine as a contemporary Wonder of the World. The Cancun National Marine Park attracts 750,000 visitors annually. Taylor’s target is to sink 8,000 statues in all; it will take several more years to  achieve the conservation project. Not all the locals agree that this is a worthwhile endeavour, and some are concerned that it will attract even more divers to the area, many of whom  are inexperienced. They believe that instead of  protecting the environment, this artiﬁcial reef  will actually damage it further.

There are many versions of the legend to explain how the slogan ‘Kilroy was here!’ came to appear all over the world. The sentence started to be seen during the Second World War in places where US troops were stationed, and people still write it on walls to this day, to continue the joke. It is often accompanied by a drawing of a kind of fairy-tale ﬁgure looking over a wall. This famous image, known as ‘Chad’, consists of a face with two large oval eyes and a long nose, and two sets of three ﬁngers holding onto a wall. The rest is hidden by the wall itself.  The best known explanation for the phenomenon is that there was a James J. Kilroy who was a ship inspector in the shipyard at Quincy, Massachusetts, USA. It was his responsibility to check on how many holes a riveter had ﬁlled during his work shift on any given day. To prevent double counting by dishonest riveters and to prove to his supervisors that he’d been doing his job, he began marking ‘Kilroy was here’ inside the bulls of the ships being built. He used yellow crayon so it would be easily visible; this way the other inspectors wouldn’t count the rivets more than once and pay the riveter for work he hadn’t done himself. (A female version of Kilroy, known as Rosie the Riveter, exists in some versions of the story.)  Once the ships became operational, carrying military troops that were headed overseas and bound for the war, it became a complete mystery why the phrase was still being seen, and not in ships but on buildings, and in out-of—the-way places. All anyone could be certain of was that Kilroy, whoever he was, had been there ﬁrst. As a joke, troops began placing the grafﬁti themselves wherever US forces landed, claiming it had already been there when they’d arrived; it quickly became a challenge  the picture and slogan in the most remote places before anyone else got there.  It is alleged to exist in the most unlikely places imaginable: on the top of Mount Everest in Nepal; on the torch of the Statue of Liberty in New York harbour; on the underside of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris; on the Marco Polo Bridge in China; on huts in Polynesia; and even scrawled in the dust on the moon.

In the Nazca desert of southern Peru you can find the largest picture gallery in the world. But this is no ordinary display of art: the drawings, a whole zoo of animals and birds, are of monster size, laid out on the desert floor. A giant condor has a wing-span of more than 120 metres; a lurking spider is nearly 50 metres long. There's a hummingbird with a vast bill, a curly-tailed monkey, a splashing whale, and many more birds, fishes and strange plant forms. Because of their size, you can't really see the magnificent pictures at ground level. Only when airborne can you appreciate the whole wriggling, flying menagerie. They are highly stylised outlines, resembling the shapes which decorate the pottery of Indians who lived around Nazca from BCE to around 900 CE. They were made by the simple, if laborious, method of removing the dark stone layer which covers the desert, or pampa, and revealing the light-coloured sand beneath. The accuracy of the designs was probably achieved by skilful scaling-up of much smaller versions. 
The awe-inspiring pictures were not discovered till 1941: they weren't easy to spot, since the desert winds had blown a thin dark layer of pebbles over the markings. The big puzzle is: why did Nazcas draw giant pictures in the sand which they couldn't see properly? Perhaps they were for the gods, not humans, to see: most have connections in Nazca mythology with water, so they could have formed a kind of prayer for rain. Another theory is that the Nazcas gave their chieftains a burial ground that could be seen from the sky. It has also been argued that they had religious significance. These marvellous monuments continue to intrigue and tantalise us; sadly, though, they are very fragile, and careless tourists have damaged a number of them. Now, the Peruvian government has banned everyone from the area where the best pictures are. Ironically, therefore, the world's biggest display of art can only be seen from the air, as originally intended but then lost sight of. 

There are many versions of the legend to explain how the slogan 'Kilroy was here!' came 
to appear all over the world. The sentence started to be seen during the Second World 
War in places where US troops were stationed, and people still write it on walls to this 
day, to continue the joke. It is often accompanied by a drawing of a kind of fairy-tale 
figure looking over a wall. This famous image, known as 'Chad', consists of a face with 

two large oval eyes and a long nose, and two sets of three fingers holding onto a wall. The rest is hidden by the wall itself. The best known explanation for the phenomenon is that there was a James J. Kilroy who was a ship inspector in the shipyard at Quincy, Massachusetts, USA. It was his responsibility to check on how many holes a riveter had filled during his work shift on any given day. To prevent double counting by dishonest riveters and to prove to his supervisors that he'd been doing his job, he began marking 'Kilroy was here' inside the hulls of the ships being built. He used yellow crayon so it would be easily visible; this way the other inspectors wouldn't count the rivets more than once and pay the riveter for work he hadn't done himself. (A female version of Kilroy, known as Rosie the Riveter, exists in some versions of the story.) Once the ships became operational, carrying military troops that were headed overseas and bound for the war, it became a complete mystery why the phrase was still being seen, and not in ships but on buildings, and in out-of-the-way places. All anyone could be certain of was that Kilroy, whoever he was, had been there first. As a joke, troops began placing the graffiti themselves wherever US forces landed, claiming it had already been there when they'd arrived; it quickly became a challenge to put the picture and slogan in the most remote places before anyone else got there. It is alleged to exist in the most unlikely places imaginable: on the top of Mount Everest in Nepal; on the torch of the Statue of Liberty in New York harbour; on the underside of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris; on the Marco Polo Bridge in China; on huts in Polynesia; and even scrawled in the dust on the moon. 

Blek le Rat is a French street artist who calls and see it, because when you leave something
himself ’The Man Who Walks Through Walls’: he is a in the street, you leave part of yourself. Street
phantom, a shadow, a myth. He began his work as artists cannot resist coming back to admire their
an urban decorator and political commentator in own handiwork; it is the main reason for doing
Parisin the early 19805, when he was twenty. He is it. He denies that he is a vandal or intends to
the pioneer, the ancestor, the grandfather of street destroy anything. He claims that the urge to
art. He took to the streets when a Parisian fortune produce graffiti, to fill a space on a blank wall, is
teller told him that she could see him working a basic human instinct, and that it can never be
with walls. At first he misunderstood what she had stopped. You can trace it back to the decoration of
meant: he started training to be an architect. cave walls 20,000 years ago. If a graffiti drawing
His real name is Xavier Prou, and at 56 years is painted over, someone else will come and fill
old he is far from being a youth rebel. He does the gap. 
not draw aggressive images, only reflective ones, Graffiti artists often have their own website
and he says, ’My images are a present I make for to remind everyone of their ‘works’. The internet
everyone to enjoy, even children. ’ His dream is has made street art a global movement, but it is
to be allowed to provide art to the city streets the art of the common people and not of highly
without having any problems. He was once paid and respectable artists. There is no bigger
caught by the police and the court case lasted contemporary cultural phenomenon in the world
a whole year. He then switched to putting up than street art. It is taking over the planet. Most i
posters instead. They are faster; you cannot stay cities are daubed with it, so much so that it is
for longer than two minutes before the police noticeable when there isn’t any. You will see it in
come. And it’s better for the walls. London, Rio, Melbourne, Barcelona, Beijing It
His designs, based on life-size stencils ofhuman is even being auctioned, like ’ real ’ works of art.
beings and animals, don’t decorate cities so much

It is the simplest things that cause the greatest change. They are often harder to achieve than more complicated ones. Sometimes they are created by accident. We take them for granted when they become part of everyday life. We forget that someone, somewhere must have had the original inspiration for them. Money The barter system had its limits. If someone didn't want to exchange a product, to swap a chicken for a pot, what could you do? The answer was to use a token instead, so that trade could take place to the benefit of both parties. Money was introduced in China in around 200 BCE, the coins having a hole in the middle so that they could be strung together and worn around the neck. But they were heavy, so in the 9th century CE paper money was invented. 

Bicycle The first two-wheeled steerable machine appeared in Germany in 1817. It was made of wood and had no pedals, so it had to be moved by pushing one's feet against the ground. It was hard work, except for going downhill. Half a century later, a version with two equal-sized wheels and pedals was invented, which 

immediately became popular with women as it gave them freedom to travel independently from the menfolk, who controlled the horse and buggy. Flat-pack furniture In the mid-1950s, a worker for a furniture company in Sweden couldn't get a new table into his vehicle, so he took the legs off in order to reassemble it when he got home. He realised that this was a breakthrough for the future making and selling of furniture, and presented the idea to his employers, IKEA. Barcodes The first barcode was made by to make narrow This soon became a unique wide lines out of them. diverse as books and packaged  Velcro A way of fastening two surfaces quickly but effectively by means of microscopic loops was the result of a dog-owner studying the way seeds got caught in his pet's fur when he took her out into the fields for a run, and the realisation of how difficult it was to remove them. 
 
