In 1940 four siblings ~ Peter, Susan, Edmund, and Lucy — are evacuated from London to escape the bomb attacks of World War 11. They are sent to live with a Professor, who lives in a large house in the countryside. While the four children are exploring the house, Lucy looks into a wardrobe and discovers a portal to a magical world, which is named Narnia. The landscape is covered by snow, as it is under a spell of ‘always winter and never Christmas ’. There Lucy meets a faun named Tumnus, who invites her to tea in his home and tells her he she should be reported to the tyrannical White Witch, the Queen of Narnia, who captures humans.  When she returns to the real world, Lucy’s siblings do not believe her story about Narnia, but her unpleasant elder brother, Edmund, follows her through the back of the wardrobe on her next  trip and is met by the White Witch, who enchants him with sweets. She  encourages him to bring his siblings to her in Narnia by promising that he can rule over them. Edmund returns home and lies to Peter and Susan, spitefully denying Lucy’s claim about  the existence of Narnia. Eventually all four of the children enter Narnia together while  hiding in the wardrobe. Lucy discovers Mr Tumnus has been imprisoned by the witch and asks her siblings to help her to find him. They meet Mr and Mrs Beaver, who invite them to dinner and recount a prophecy that the White Witch’s power will fail when four children — two male and two female — fill the four thrones at Cair Paravel. The Beavers tell of the true king of Narnia — a great lion named Aslan — who after many years ’ absence is now ‘on the move again ’. Edmund sneaks away to see the White Witch, whose castle is filled with the stone statues of her former enemies.  The Beavers, realising where Edmund has gone, lead the other children to Aslan. As they travel, they notice that the snow is melting, indicating that the White Witch’s spell is breaking. This is confirmed by Father Christmas, whom they encOunter on the way. The children and the Beavers meet with Aslan and his army. Peter takes part in his first battle with a sword given to him by Father Christmas, killing a wolf who threatens Susan.  The Witch approaches to speak with Aslan, insisting that ‘ according to magic tradition she has the right to execute Edmund as a traitor because he has escaped from her power. Aslan speaks with her privately and persuades her not to put him to death. That evening, Aslan secretly leaves the camp but is followed by Lucy and Susan. They discover that Aslan has offered his own life in exchange for Edmund’s. Aslan is tied to the Stone Table and then killed by the Witch with a knife. The following morning, however, Aslan is miraculously alive again, because someone who willingly dies in the place of another is allowed to return to life.  Aslan allows Lucy and Susan to ride on his back as he hurries to the Witch’s castle. There he breathes upon the statues and they come alive. Peter and Edmund lead the Narnian army in a battle against the White Witch’s army, but they are losing until Aslan arrives with the former statues as reinforcements. The Narnians defeat the evil army, and the Witch is killed by the victorious Aslan. The children are named kings and queens of Narnia.  Several years later, and now adult, the siblings go hunting for a White Stag. Suddenly, tree branches turn into coathangers, and they find themselves back in the wardrobe as children again.


Jim Hawkins lives with his mother in an inn the Admiral Benbow on the south coast of England in a village called Black Hill Cove. One day an ancient sailor Captain Billy Bones turns up there apparently intending to stay. He hires jim to keep a look out for other sailors but despite all precautions he is hunted down by Blind Pew and Black Dog and served with the ‘black spot ’ a symbol that means death. A group of pirates raid the inn in search of the chest containing the old sailor’s papers but they do not find them and jim does. They include a map showing the location of the pirate Flint’s buried treasure on Skeleton Island in the West Indies which Jim Doctor Livesey and Squire Trelawney decide to go in search of. After finding a ship the ‘Hispaniola’ and a crew they set out on their voyage with Jim as the ship’s cabin boy  Unfortunately, the crew includes a one-legged pirate, Long John Silver, who also wants to find the treasure. He has a talking parrot, which sits on his shoulder. Jim, hidden in an apple barrel, overhears the crew’s plan to mutiny, and he warns his comrades of the pirates ’ conspiracy.  The battle between the pirates and Jim’s party is an exciting and bloody one, taking place both on the ship and on. the desert island after they arrive. Jim discovers on the island a marooned sailor, Ben Gunn, left behind three years earlier, who shows him where Flint’s treasure was buried and the cave in which he has now hidden it.  Jim manages to take control of the ‘Hispaniola’, but he is captured by Long John Silver on land. They do a deal that Jim’s life will be spared in return for Long John Silver not being hanged for piracy when they return home.  In a few weeks’ time, he disappears at the first port they stop at in America, with some of the gold guineas now in the ship’s hold. Everyone else returns safe and rich to England.

Thinking quickly, the King said, ‘To slay me here, since you are
armed and I dressed humbly in my hunting clothes, would bring
you no honour, and shame would follow you for the rest of your
life. I’ll grant you anything you care to name - any amount of land
or gold - to spare my life. desire, ’’

‘There is no land or gold, of any amount, that I desire, ’ said 
the Knight. ‘However, I will get what I seek in an honourable way.
I’ll give you a chance to solve a riddle. One year and a day from
now, you must appear before me here in these woods, without
companions and without weapons. If at that time you are unable to
solve this riddle, there can be no objection to my taking your life.
But if you answer the riddle correctly, there will be no battle and
you will be free to leave. You must swear on your honour that you 
will return in one year and a day, as I have commanded. ’

‘I agree to your terms, ’ said the King. ‘What is the riddle?’
