The kingdom of Vijaynagar had not been enjoying good relations with its neighbouring state for a very long time. Jealous opponents of Tenali Rama, one of the king’s ministers and the most able of them all, found it the perfect opportunity to damage his reputation. So they went about poisoning King Krishnadeva Rai’s mind against him.
One day, when the king sat in his chamber pondering over the affairs of the state, one of his courtiers came up and whispered into his ear, ‘Your Majesty, have you heard the latest? ’
The king was surprised and exclaimed, ‘No, I have not! What’s going on? ’
‘Your Majesty, Tenali is in the pay of the neighbouring king. He has been spying on us for them.’
‘What are you talking about? ’ asked the king angrily.
‘This has been going on for a long time, your Majesty. But you. would not listen to a word against Tenali. He has cast such a spell on you that you refuse to even think that he might betray you.’
‘Tenali Rama is faithful to the kingdom. It is impossible that he would do such a thing. You have been misinformed,’ the king replied with confidence.
But the courtier convinced the king to take his accusation seriously in those times of great intrigue. The king promised to investigate the matter and agreed that if Tenali Rama was found guilty, he would be punished. But his heart was heavy and he hoped that Tenali Rama would deny the charge.'
The king sent for Tenali Rama the following day. Without wasting time he immediately asked the minister whether he was in league with the neighbouring state.
The question shocked Tenali Rama so much that he could not say anything. When Krishnadeva Rai found that Tenali Rama had nothing to say, he became angry and thundered, ‘Your silence shows your guilt.’
Deeply hurt that the king could doubt his loyalty, Tenali Rama said that he refused to answer such a preposterous charge. This made the king even more angry. He ordered Tenali Rama to leave his kingdom. He could have ordered him to be put to death for the  crime of treachery, but the king respected Tenali Rama’s high status and their previous good relationship.


Tenali Rama did not say a single word in his defence and went away  with his head bowed in misery. When his enemies heard that Tenali  Rama had been expelled from the kingdom, their joy knew no bounds.

Tenali Rama reached the neighbouring state and met the king there. When Tenali Rama revealed his name, the king welcomed him warmly. He had heard much about Tenali Rama’s Wisdom.  But the king was surprised to see Tenali Rama in his court.  ‘Raja Krishnadeva Rai considers me his enemy, so what are you doing here? ’  The minister replied, ‘Majesty, you are a learned man. You have great strength. You are a good administrator and wish your people well. Our king also possesses all these virtues. He regards you as a friend and he has sent me to remove the existing misunderstanding between us. ’  The king was surprised. ‘Your king considers me a friend?  But our spies warned us that Krishnadeva Rai was thinking of attacking us. ’  Tenali Rama said, ‘Our spies have fed our king the same pack of lies. That is why he has sent me to you. Has war ever benefitted anybody? ’  The king believed Tenali Rama’s story He said, ‘I do not want war, either. But how can I believe that Krishnadeva Rai really wants peace? ’  Tenali Rama suggested that the king send a messenger with gifts and a message of peace to Vijaynagar. If King Krishnadeva Rai accepted the gifts, it would mean that he, too, wanted to be friends. But if he returned the gifts, then obviously he wanted war.  The king was impressed with this idea, and sent his special messenger to Vijaynagar the next day.  * * * >l< *  Meanwhile, King Krishnadeva Rai had come to know that Tenali Rama was innocent and that the courtiers had conspired against him. As soon as the messenger from the neighbouring state reached him with costly gifts, he was delighted. He was full of praise for Tenali Rama’s wisdom and sent his own minister with gifts to the neighbouring state, with a request that the king send back Tenali Rama.  When Tenali Rama returned to Vijaynagar, King Krishnadeva Rai welcomed him warmly and offered him precious gifts. He rewarded him with an even higher rank in the court, that of chief minister. And he also swore that he would punish the wicked courtiers who had poisoned his ear against his favourite.

This story is set in the early 20th century near London. The narrator is not given a name. He witnesses the landing of a cylinder space ship. It was launched from Mars. It opens to let out tentacled Martians. They assemble strange machinery in the form of tripods. When humans move towards the Martians, they are incinerated by an invisible heat—ray. The narrator ﬂees the scene. He meets a soldier. This man tells him a that another cylinder has landed. It cuts the narrator off from his wife.  These war machines defeat the army’s weapons and start to attack the local communities. More cylinders land across the English countryside and people ﬂee their homes in the face of the invasion. Three of the tripods are destroyed by the military, but soon all organised resistance has been overcome. A Martian red weed appears. It takes over the landscape. The narrator becomes trapped in a half-destroyed building. He sees the Martians from close by. They behave in a terrifying way towards the humans they catch. He only narrowly escapes capture himself.  In the end, both the red weed and the Martians themselves are defeated by bacteria. These do not exist on Mars and so have a fatal effect.
