I must have been very young at the time. While I don’t remember exactly how old I was, I do remember that when people saw me with my grandfather they would pat me on the head and give my cheek a pinch — things they didn’t do to my grandfather. The strange thing was that  I never used to go out with my father, rather it was my grandfather who would take me with him wherever he went, except for the mornings when I would go to the mosque to learn the Koran. The mosque, the river and the fields  — these were the landmarks in our life. While most of the children of my age grumbled at having to go to the mosque to learn the Koran, I used to love it. The reason was, no doubt, that I was quick at learning by heart and the Sheikh always asked me to stand up and recite the Chapter of the Merciful whenever we had visitors, who would pat me on my head and cheek just as people did when they saw me with my grandfather.
Yes, I used to love the mosque, and I loved the river too. Directly we finished our Koran reading in the morning, I would throw down my wooden slate and dart off, quick as a genie, to my mother, hurriedly swallow down my breakfast, and run off  for a plunge in the river.
Before my grandfather ever replied to my many questions he would rub the tip of his nose with his forefinger; as for his heard, it was soft and luxuriant and as white as cotton~wool — never in my life have I seen anything of a purer whiteness or greater beauty.
My grandfather must also have been extremely tall for I never saw anyone in the whole area address him without having to look up at him, nor did I see him enter a house without having to bend so low that I was put in mind of the way the river wound round behind the wood of acacia trees. I loved him and would imagine myself, when I grew to be a man, tall and slender like him, walking along with great strides.  I believe I was his favourite grandchild: no wonder, for my cousins were a stupid bunch and I — so they say — was an intelligent child. I used to know when my grandfather wanted me to laugh, when to be silent; also I would remember the times for his prayers and would bring him his prayer-rug and fill the ewer for his ablutions without his having to ask me. When he had nothing else to do he enjoyed listening to me reciting to him from the Koran in a lilting voice, and I could tell from his face that he was moved.

Memories of an African childhood: school days 
Waking up was not an easy task. My mom I have never known why. That done, we 
would drag me out of bed and toss me out would herd around the hearth sipping tea. 
of the house to a waiting basin of water to My mom maintained such a serious 
wash my face. Washing one’s face before countenance in the morning. You could 
eating breakfast was such a cardinal rule easily earn a slap or a cooking stick on 
i in that household nobody ever skipped it. your tiny head at that particular time over 

a slight mistake. We took our breakfast with such quiet all you could hear was swigging and chewing sounds. Since school was near, the first bell would ring and the next would mean we were late. When we woke early enough, we would wash our legs and arms (having washed our faces before breakfast), oil ourselves, sling our tiny bags on our backs and go running the short distance to school. My school bag was populated by only two exercise books: wide ruled for 'writing' and narrow ruled for 'math'. The other 

occupant of that school bag was a small piece of pencil. My pencils were made shorter by my gnawing habits when writing. If you were late, you were stopped at the gate by the teacher on duty, made to kneel holding your ears and crawl the hundred meters to the assembly place thus. At the assembly, you were caned four strokes or five, or even ten, depending on the cruelty of that particular teacher. At the assembly, we would sing the National Anthem and the Loyalty Pledge, pray, sing a hymn and be addressed by teachers. After that, they would check whether we had long nails. If you had long ones, you were given a good beating and sent home. Done with the assembly, we would run to class. There was an obsession 

with us kids to always run whenever we were going anywhere and be the first to get there and shout 'one', 'one'. The second one would shout 'two', 'two' and so forth. Whether going to the latrines, going out for breaks or coming back from lunch (we went home for lunch) we never walked. We always ran. Another obsession of us kids was saying everything at the top of our voices. When asked your name, you would shout it out at the top of your voice. In my case then `My name is Alfred Kiprotich Barusei Kenduiywo Kilachei . . .' Learning was by rote so we would shout everything after the teacher.  The only pupil who was disadvantaged in this game was a friend of mine called Peter. He was such a stammerer that I never got to know his second name till he dropped out of school. He could faint trying to get a single syllable out. The first lesson of the day was always Math which I loathed no end. We would go to the dusty road behind our school, clear a space each and write down our Math. 1, 2, 3, 4 . . . etc. Very big ones. The teacher would come and mark with his finger too. A long tick or a big cross. If not solving Math on the dirt road (there were no vehicles) we would count the sticks or bottle tops in class. We would also count our fingers and toes. That was Math. I had a cousin, Stephen, who went by the nickname 'Tractor', maybe because he was huge. He was very good at Math but he hardly came to school. The reason why he stuck in my mind is because of his handwriting. When he was writing say a figure '1', he would draw such a big one that it would occupy the whole page. Ditto everything else. He finished his exercise 

books in a day. He is now called ‘54’, a ‘The cat is drinking milk. ’ 5
very interesting fellow indeed. And so on and so forth.
The second lesson was English. We English tests involved ‘filling in the 5
would sing A, B, C, D . . . the whole missing words ’. The ‘ a ’ in ‘ cat ’, the ‘ o ’ in 5
time. At times we would be given text ‘ boy ’ etc. It was very easy for me and I 5
books titled ‘Tom and Mary’. This was would score 100%. Did I tell you that 5
my favorite subject. ‘Tom and Mary’ we were categorized in rows according to
was an illustrated book about a family cleverness? My row (I was brilliant except 5
of Mr and Mrs Kamau. Mr Kamau was in Math) was called Lion, the next was 5
a school-bus driver. Mrs Kamau was a Elephant and the dullest of us were called 5
housewife. Tom and Mary were pupils. Giraffe. We sat on benches that were fixed 5
They had a little brother called Peter, a to the ground. 5
dog and a cat. I remember everything like The third lesson was Science. We just 5
yesterday because English was my favorite planted beans and maize in tins at the 5
subject. We would sing about these stories corner of our class. Our classes did not
after our teacher. We could not read so have doors or windows. Our plants would 5
everything in our class was sung after bend towards the light and that was 5
the teacher: Science for us! There was Home Science 5
‘The man is Mr Kamau.’ too. Other subjects were Mother-tongue, 5
‘The woman is Mrs Kamau.’ Swahili, Civics, History, Geography, Art 5
‘The boy is Tom.’ and Craft, Music and Physical Education. 5
‘The girl is Mary. ’ They deserve a whole page each to 5
‘The baby is Peter. ’ describe. 5


The tarantella is a whirling southern Italian dance once thought to be a remedy for the bite of a tarantula spider. Tarantella Do you remember an Inn, Miranda? Do you remember an Inn? And the tedding and the spreading Of the straw for a bedding, And the fleas that tease in the High Pyrenees, And the wine that tasted of tar? And the cheers and the jeers of the young muleteers (Under the vine of the dark veranda)? Do you remember an Inn, Miranda, Do you remember an Inn? And the cheers and the jeers of the young muleteers Who hadn't got a penny, And who weren't paying any, And the hammer at the doors and the din? And the hip! hop! hap! Of the clap Of the hands to the swirl and the twirl Of the girl gone chancing, Glancing, Dancing, Backing and advancing, Snapping of the clapper to the spin Out and in —And the ting, tong, tang of the guitar! Do you remember an Inn, Miranda? Do you remember an Inn? Never more; Miranda, Never more. Only the high peaks hoar; And Aragon a torrent at the door. No sound In the walls of the halls where falls 

Piano Softly, in the dusk, a woman is singing to me; Taking me back down the vista of years, till I see A child sitting under the piano, in the boom of the tingling strings And pressing the small, poised feet of a mother who smiles as she sings. In spite of myself, the insidious mastery of song Betrays me back, till the heart of me weeps to belong To the old Sunday evenings at home, with winter outside And hymns in the cosy parlour, the tinkling piano our guide. So now it is vain for the singer to burst into clamour With the great black piano appassionato. The glamour Of childish days is upon me, my manhood is cast Down in the flood of remembrance, I weep like a child for the past.

It was long ago

I’ll tell you, shall I, something I remember?
Something that still means a great deal to me.

It was long ago.

A dusty road in summer I remember,

A mountain, and an old house, and a tree

That stood, you know,

Behind the house. An old woman I remember

In a red shawl with a grey cat on her knee
Humming under a tree.

She seemed the oldest thing I can remember,

But then perhaps I was not more than three.
It was long ago.

I dragged on the dusty road, and I remember
How the old woman looked over the fence at me
And seemed to know

How it felt to be three, and called out, I remember
‘Do you like bilberries and cream for tea? ’

I went under the tree

And while she hummed, and the cat purred, I remember
How she filled a saucer with berries and cream for me
So long ago,
Such berries and such cream as I remember
I never had seen before and never see
Today, you know
And that is almost all I can remember,
The house, the mountain, the grey cat on her knee,
Her red shawl, and the tree,
And the taste of the berries, the feel of the sun I remember,
And the smell of everything that used to be
So long ago,
Till the heat on the road outside again I remember,
And how the long dusty road seemed to have for me
No end, you know
That is the farthest thing I can remember.
It won’t mean much to you. It does to me.
Then I grew up, you see.

