The first star catalogue was completed by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus in 129 BCE.
In 1543 the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus claimed that the Earth moved around the Sun!
Danishman Tycho Brahe was a famous naked—eye astronomer. He built the world's leading observatory in Uraniborg in 1576.
The first telescope were probably made by spectacle-makers in the early 1600s. They made distant objects appear closer.
In 1609, the Italian scientist, Galileo, built a telescope that allowed hm to view sunspots and the moons of Jupiter. In 1613, he used his observations to prove Copernicus's theory correct.



Yuri Gagarin was born in Klushino, a small village west of Moscow, the third of four children. Growing up during World War 11, life was difﬁcult. His father worked as a carpenter and bricklayer and his mother worked as a milkmaid.
In school, Yuri was good at mathematics and physics. After school, he discovered a love of ﬂying and joined the Soviet Air Force. He enjoyed being a ﬁghter pilot, but he really wanted to go to space.
In 1960, he was one of 20 applicants chosen to be the Soviet Union’s ﬁrst cosmonaut. Gagarin remained calm under the pressure of the intense training and  excelled at the tasks, while also keeping his sense of humour. Later, he was chosen to be the ﬁrst man into space because of these skills.  It also helped that he was short and could ﬁt into a small space capsule!
On 12th April 1961, at 9:07 am. Vostok 1 was launched. Just after lift-off, Gagarin is said to have called out, Poyekhali! (‘Off we go!’). He was rocketed into space and completed a single orbit around Earth.
At the end of the orbit, Vostok 1 re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere. Gagarin ejected (as planned) from the spacecraft and used a parachute to land safely just 108 minutes after blast off. Yuri Gagarin became both the ﬁrst person to enter space and the ﬁrst person to orbit the Earth.


Well, it has been a busy week! The main event was the arrival of the Progress resupply craft. The long wait was well worth it. Once the spacecraft was secured, we equalised the pressure and cracked open the hatch. ‘Gorby‘ (our nickname for the Progress) was overﬂowing with exciting goodies for us. Not only did we get fresh food like apples, tomatoes and oranges (just love that smell) but also hocolate (lots of it!). It’s great to eat fresh food again, I automatically feel healthier.
We also got some cards and gifts from FFF (family, friends and fans) back home. Everyone took a little time to themselves to sit back, read and enjoy the news (though old) from home.

astronomy  astronauts cosmonauts observatory orbit spacecarft telescope biography journal satellite childhood nickname abbrevations subject catalouge natural man-made accomplished cosmonaut training observatory invention crater survive waste standared reuse refuse processed  misunderstanding resupply craft busy hatch equalised 

haiku reflection nature obvious subtle analyse personification comparison simile metaphor structure contrast atmosphere trembling passing neither dictated scary mischievous angry forgetful excited flint emerald sapphire shines mud dimaond brilliant store desire opal fiery spark bitter sparrows necks ducks plumes reflect off silent bobbing corks swifts riotous piercings shot past metaphor stroking eyelashes whispers breeze rustled broke limb guava straw scooped pushed canefied tremble analyse  

