One ﬁne summer’s day, deep in a meadow, a grasshopper was bouncing about, chirruping and singing without a care in the world. An ant bustled by, weighed down by the enormous ear of corn she was lugging to her nest. Time and time again, the grasshopper watched the ant scurry back and forth gathering food — insects, ﬂies, grains of wheat — anything she could ﬁnd, never once stopping to admire the glorious day or relax in the rays. The grasshopper found this difﬁcult to fathom and teased her as she busied by, saying, “Take it easy there, Ant! I don’t understand why you’re working so hard. The day is long! Food is plentiful. Come and - rest awhile, and listen to my latest melody.”

“As it happens, Grasshopper, I am storing up food for winter and you should be doing the same. Summer won’t last forever, you know," snapped the ant as she continued on her industrious way, if anything toiling just a little harder. The grasshopper guffawed at the idea of working on such a day and hopped happily off into the sunset, singing and jigging all the way.
And summer didn’t last. It never does. Winter came, bringing barren fare and frosty ﬁelds. Grasshopper’s song stuck in his throat as he shivered without shelter or sustenance, gazing wistfully at the ants as they munched liberally from their stores of food, shaking their heads at him and offering him nothing.  “How foolish I have been!” he wailed, for only then did Grasshopper understand that he should have made provision for winter as Ant had said.


Summer had been a blast and Gentle Geoffrey had loved every minute. He felt so inspired and his music was sweeter than ever. Auntie Anthea had also enjoyed the summer. Gentle Geoffrey’s music had certainly made cleaning and collecting food seem much less effort.
As the weather cooled, Gentle Geoffrey’s chirruping became a little less cheerful. Auntie Anthea, on the other hand, was still scrubbing and storing, although it seemed a little more of a chore.
By the time the winter chill set in, Geoffrey felt famished and frail. He’d played music all summer with his head in the clouds, so he had no home to go to and no food to eat. But just as he thought he should do something, he caught a faint melody in the whistling wind and once more could think of little else. Auntie Anthea, meanwhile, was warm and well-fed but was ﬁnding winter dull, with little to liven up her diet and daily chores. All of a sudden, she thought of Geoffrey.
“What a tasty treat!" she clapped.  “I adore insects and Geoffrey will make a delicious difference. He never knows what’s what with all that music ﬁlling his head. He’ll leap at the chance of ﬁlling his tummy and I’ve never grazed on a grasshopper before.”
“A  A  Auntie Anthea," shivered Geoffrey, surprised to see her braving the frosty ﬁelds. “Wh  wh  whaddya you doing here?"
“I couldn’t help thinking of you turning into a block of ice out here, " said Anthea,  trying to keep the anticipation in her voice at bay. “I want a tenant, and who could be more delicious, I mean delightful, than you?”


“delicious? That doesn’t sound so cool. I think I’ll  give it a miss, if it’s all the  same to you," quavered Geoffrey.
“Well, it’s not — my heart’s set on you taking you home for supper, " lured Anthea. “Iust come on inside for a bit.”
“A  bit of What?”
"A bit of a bite, of course!” snapped Anthea, with a touch of irritation.
"But  bite of wh  wh  what?” Geoffrey worried as he crumpled to the ground, too weak to stand.
Anthea dashed forward, slung Geoffrey onto her back, hauled him home and laid him in front of the ﬁre, licking her lips in anticipation. Geoffrey, revived by the warmth, thought for a moment and then smiled winningly at Anthea.
“Auntie, the other insects said you were, well, mean, but you seem so kind. What can I, you know, do, um, to thank you for your hospitality?”
"Well, I had thought ...” Anthea trailed off, hoping her tummy wasn’t rumbling too obviously.
“Hmmm! I’d rather sing for my supper than be your supper,” Geoffrey declared, and he began to sing, softly at ﬁrst but gaining in strength with every note. Anthea loved it and suddenly realised what was really good about having Gentle Geoffrey in her home. She could cook and clean and he could keep her company and entertain her friends. Now that would be a giant leap forward for antkind!



Three ﬁsh lived in a pond. One was named Plan Ahead, another was Think Fast, and the Third was named Wait and See. One day they heard a ﬁsherman say that he was going to cast his net in their pond the next day. Plan Ahead said, “I’m swimming down the river tonight!" Think Fast said, “I’m sure I’ll come up with a plan,”
Wait and See lazily said, “I just can’t think about it now!”
When the fisherman casts his nets, Plan Ahead was long gone. But Think Fast and Wait and See were caught.
Think Fast quickly rolled his belly up and pretended to be dead. "Oh, this ﬁsh is no good!” said the ﬁsherman, and threw him safely back into the water. But Wait and See ended up in the ﬁsh market. That is why they say; "In times of danger, when the net is cast, plan ahead or plan to think fast!"  


fathom infer spill bean 


