Cambridge International A Level English Language

'—
Z
I.”
E
E
O
U

 

Joelle and her mother are sharing a book about a farm. In their
conversation, the mother is building on Joelle’s limited vocabulary and
syntax by using more complex utterances which Joelle can understand
even though her own speech is more limited.

Joelle is able to recognise animals which may or may not be
present in her own environment. If they are not, then she is able to
understand and maybe imagine a little about the animals; they are in
a ﬁeld, they eat grass and are on a farm. Joelle knows the appropriate
nouns even though she is making Virtuous errors (sheeps). Her
language is moving though the telegraphic stage as she is phrasing
utterances in the simple way of subject/verb (sheep eat) and is also
using modiﬁers for extra description (big, green). Interestingly she
has an understanding of linking words and some determiners (a, the).
However, she is not using them all the time showing that they have
not yet been assimilated as the appropriate forms to use. She is not yet
secure with her colours.

Through talking with her mother, Joelle has a clear understanding of
the conventions of turn—taking conversation and adds her comments to
the more extensive ones which her mother is making. Joelle understands
a lot more than she is able to say.

Language acquisition by children and
teenagers

The speed of language acquisition in the pre—school child makes it an exciting

area to observe and analyse. By the time a child with no signiﬁcant development
problems is in full—time school at around the age of ﬁve, they are able to function as
independent conversationalists with others in their world.

Your own language will have developed along with all your other cognitive
abilities during your time in school. In addition to speech development, you will
have become skilled in reading and writing. Unlike speech, these skills are not
instinctive and have to be taught. They are however, central to our measurement of
an educated society.

ACTIVITY 7.6

1 How did you learn to read and write?

2 What early children’s books did you enjoy? How important were books
and shared reading while you were learning to read and in your early days
as an independent reader?

3 Which particular elements of learning to read and write in your native
language were challenging? Which did you enjoy most?

4 Do you feel you have more to learn with regard to reading, writing and
speaking? If so, in which particular ways? A discussion of your ideas with
other members of your class would be useful here.For more about registerturn to
page 193 of Unit 5.

Unit 7: Child language acquisition

Language development from five to eleven years

You may ﬁnd occasional overlaps between the information in this and earlier
sections of this unit. This is because the stages at which language development takes
place, although sequential, are approximate and may cut across different age groups.

people with whom they have different relationships, for example the head teacher,
classroom teacher, classroom assistants, bus drivers, dinner ladies, classmates, older
and younger pupils. They learn that these different relationships are reﬂected in the
different register or level of formality they must use in their speech.

Reading and writing skills assume more importance at this stage of
development. There have been many research studies about the inﬂuence of
language skills on pupils’ progress across the curriculum. In Britain, language
skills are often linked to lifestyle and social class and it is widely documented
that children from economically deprived backgrounds achieve less academic
success than their wealthier counterparts. One theory which linked language with
achievement was developed in Britain in the 1960s by Basil Bernstein. Bernstein
asserted that there are two patterns of language used by school children — a
restricted code and an elaborated code.

The restricted code is associated with lower socio—economic groups. The
elaborated code is usually associated with higher socio—economic groups. The codes
are not dialects and both are found within Standard English.

According to Bernstein’s theory, the restricted code is briefer and more
condensed and is very context—bound, so that only the immediate group would be
able to understand it. He linked the theory of the different codes and educational
success with the assertion that schools use the elaborated code of communication

 

 

263Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

 

Restricted code

    
   

repetition ofsimple
conjuctions (and)

 

simple and short sentences

     
 
   
 
 

simple clauses

restricted
code

commands and questions

 
 
   

limited vocabulary and
reasoning

assertive statements

     
   

Examples of restricted code: Don’t do that ’cos [said not to; Getyour lunch box and get ready and we’ll get to
school; Shut that door; Right, keep the noise down, Isaid keep it down, OK; Come on get a move on, you’ll be late
for school, and make sure you get home quickly we’re offdown the road, now get moving!

a Elaborated code i i'

unusual and varied
vocabulary

a range of utterances
and reasoning

Examples of elaborated code: Please don’t keep banging the door, it’s noisy and we’ll all develop a nasty

headache; Afterl meetyou from school today we’ll go on the bus into the city where we’ll meet Granny so please
try to leave school as quickly as possible.

   
 

accurate and varied
grammatical order and syntax
including the use of the
passive voice

     
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

elaborated
code

  
 

complex sentences with
coordinate and subordinate
clauses

 
 

ml

with their pupils. Middle—class children arrive at school familiar with this style
of language and therefore have an advantage. Working—class children, with their
restricted code, are not so familiar with the elaborated code and so struggle to
make sense of the communication of information in the curriculum.

Social conditions have changed since Bernstein’s theory was ﬁrst proposed and
the sharp divisions between the working and middle classes in Britain and other
parts of the world have become blurred. However, regular reports about the lack of

educational attainment in areas of deprivation may suggest that the language codes
outlined by Bernstein could be a contributory factor.

a