3 KEY TERMS

 

 

  

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

Key technique: imagery

ACTIVITY 1.54

Read the following commentary on the Indian Prime Minister’s speech which
explores the tone and mood.

I How well has the writer of the commentary explored the mood of the
speech?
I Do you agree with his or her comments?

I What role does the writer say imagery plays in creating the tone and
mood?

The speaker adopts a solemn voice, using imagery based on contrasts
to suggest the change from a mood of hope (light) to a present and
future empty and forlorn world (darkness everywhere). Syntactically,
the speaker appears uncertain initially (I do not know what to tel/you)
but confirms the one truth he does now know (we will notsee him
again that is a terrible blow) and confirms that truth by the use of
direct statements (We will not run to him), the use of the future tense
underlining the idea ofa bleak outlook. There is a sense of unity in

the way that the speaker places himselfon the same level as those he
governs (I do not know what to tellyou  Our... we called him), conveying
the idea that they are part of the same family which has lost its role
model and figurehead, its ‘father’.

The speaker proves his fallibility again by admitting he was wrong,
doubling back to develop and sustain his extended image of light and
dark: the future is not bleak. The repeated reference to the light, the
progressive change in tenses (was no ordinary light . .. illumined 
will illumine) and the parallel structures (for these many years  for
many more years  and a thousand years later) create a sense of a
progressively uplifting note of hope and vision. The words move from
one particular place (this country) to a reference to the world, offering an
impression that the hope symbolized by the lost leader is an inspiration
far beyond the reaches of this time and place. The phrases draw on ideas
of expansion and immortality, a sense that though the physical being
of their leader may be gone, his spirit will live forever (innumerable 
eternal), infusing the rest of humanity in their hearts.

There is a structural contrast in evidence: although the speaker may
have shown that he himself is human in the way he has been uncertain
and changed his initial observation, Gandhi has moved beyond that
mortal level.

>.
5‘:
'—
2
[LI
2
E
O
U

 

’0 '5 5 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

61Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Persuasive articles

Other forms of individual opinions about particular issues can be found in the
writing of newspaper and magazine columnists. Persuasive articles use many of the
same techniques as scripted speeches. Indeed, we might even see some persuasive
articles as a form of monologue by a writer hoping to reach an (unseen) audience.
Framed in the guise of personal writing, such columnists often give vent to their
Views about a particular matter which affects them in some way and turn this into a
topic that has wider concerns.

Key technique: the mode of address
One key technique used in persuasive articles is adapting the mode of address.
This is often tied up with formality and informality, but it can go beyond this. For
example, we might notice very direct language which speaks to the reader/audience
as if they are the only person listening or reading. This can be a feature of other
types of article, too.

Read these two travel accounts:

2 KEY TERMS

 

ACTIVITY 1.55

Make notes on these
questions:

A I know whatyou’re thinking. What was I doing in a bar in the depths of
Eastern Europe at midnight, playing cards with a bunch of shady characters in
motorcycle jackets? Me, a naive, young woman who had only ever been abroad
once  on a day trip with my mum and dad. Well, don’t worry. I was asking
myself the very same question.

I How do the modes of
address differ in these
two accounts? B

I What effect does this
n have on the mood of each
piece? (Which one seems

more humorous, for
example?)

Everything about the bar was of concern. There were a number of men, of a certain
age, gathered round a beer-soaked table, playinga card—game. The lights above
were ﬁzzing, and cigarette smoke wafted about, hiding their shadowy faces from
time to time.

Now read the text below taken from an article by a newspaper columnist. In it, she
addresses the issue of parenthood.

Enough. Enough already. I don’t

want to hear any more. I am sick 
of reading about mums feeling ’

desolate, how hard motherhood is
 The joy around Victoria Beckham
having a girl after three boys was as
ridiculous as her heels. Thank God!
Yes, her life making frocks in LA
with David and three gorgeous boys
must have been torture before.

I don’t want to mum—bash, but
I do want mums to open their eyes

and see what they have. At the risk of 

being lynched — give it a break. Give
me a break. Give women like me, who
wanted children but don’t have them,

a break. You mums do not know how 

blessed you are — so please just be
happy and quit complaining. You got
the prize. You have the child. Rejoice.

Of course being a mum has its
difﬁculties — but they are ﬁnite and
surmountable. If you haven’t had
a child, that devastating problem
can never be solved. So raising a
child is expensive? So is being single
and living alone. You are tired and
shattered? That must be horrible —
but that feeling can be short—term
and the pros (snuggling up to your
warm, chubby baby) surely outweigh
that particular con? (And let me tell

you, the emotional upset of crying 

congratulations down the phone

when your sister nervously tells you
she is pregnant, just days after you’ve
been told you most probably never
will be, can be exhausting too.)

You feel you have lost your
identity? Well, I’d say you’ve gained
a better one. And the women who
write “mum” on their Twitter and
Facebook bios know that too.
Mothers are treated as superior
citizens. Pavements and public
transport become yours (I was once
asked to get off a bus so a woman with
a pram could get on, but let’s not re—
enact that ugly scene here) and the
world can’t get enough of you.

From an article by Bibi Lynch, The GuardianUnit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

ACTIVITY 1.56

1 Read the passage again and identify examples of any of the techniques and
effects you have learned about in this section on persuasive writing. You
might look in particular at:

gun/«'40

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

TIP
Terms such as voice and mode

ofaddress refer to similar
aspects of texts so don’t get
too concerned about which
one you use. The key thing

is that, whatever the term,
you consider the manner and
language in which a writer
expresses his or herthoughts.

I the mode of address (e.g. does the writer address the reader directly or
indirectly?)

I repetitions and patterns, repeated words and phrases

I emotive language and rhetorical questions

I use of personal anecdotes, references to the writer’s own life

I vivid images or use of imagery.

Wr

2 ite your own commentary on the style and language of the extract.

’ ' , FuRTHER READING Read the following comments on the longer article about motherhood.
You may have noticed:

I the use of short dramatic sentences offering a strong opinion [Enough Enough
already Thank God!  Rejoice] '

I the use of lists of three [I am sick of reading about mums feeling desolate, how
hard motherhood is, and how some women can’t quite cope] and repetitive
syntactical structures [give it a break. Give me a break. Give women like me, who
wanted children but don’t have them, a break] to convey the writer’s sense of
being overwhelmed and exhausted

 

63
I how the mode of address appears to be informal in terms of sharing the same

gender but also appears quite aggressive as the writer feels her difference to
those who can have children [You mums do not know how blessed you are — so
pleasejust be happy and quit complaining You got the prize. You have the child],
with the use of imperatives and further syntactical patterning Y

I the use of questions, as if the writer is addressing counter-arguments in order to
dismiss them [So raising a child is expensive? So is being single and living alone.
You are tired and shattered? That must be horrible] with abrupt and dismissive
direct statements which contain her certainty.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Persuasive writing texts share many similar conventions.
I Pay attention to the mode of address, which can affect mood and tone.

I Consider how syntactical patterning and use of sentence variety can convey
thoughts and reﬂections.

Practice and self-evaluation

In this section you will:

I have the opportunity to apply and practise independently the techniques and
effects you have learned about

I evaluate what you have learned and what you need to improve.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Applying what you have learned
You have learned about a wide range of techniques and devices used by writers in
non—ﬁction texts. You have also learned about a useful process to follow when doing
your own commentary. Now you have the chance, without additional guidance, to
put what you have learned into practice.

The task is as follows:

Comment on the language and style used by the writer to convey his experience ofa
visit to the saltﬂats ofBolivz'a.

(Ask your teacher to set you an appropriate time limit to complete the reading and

the task.)

Solitude, serenity and salt

As I stepped out of the Toyota Land Cruiser, it felt
like walking on shattered glass. Spinning around, all

I could see was a white void stretching to the horizon,
a surreal, almost lunar landscape. It struck me that
this might be the closest the planet has to complete,
timeless nothingness; from pre—Incan peoples to the
present day, humanity has made almost no impression
on this endless expanse of white.

Covering some 4,000 square miles at an altitude
of 3,650m, the Salar de Uyuni in Bolivia is the
world’s largest salt ﬂat. It has long been a popular
destination for backpackers, who come and stay in
the handful of basic hotels around its perimeter and
make day—trip excursions out into the salty desert.
Now, though, travellers can stay right in the middle
of the mesmerising emptiness, camping out in a shiny
Airstream caravan.

The trips have been created by Darius Morgan,

a local tour operator and hotelier who has imported
three 25ft-long Airstream Safari caravans from the

US so that guests can view the bizarre landscape in
glorious solitude. “Now you can pay for the indulgence
of being completely alone — you feel as if you actually
own time and space,” he told me when I ﬂew down
from La Paz earlier this month to be his ﬁrst guest.

The hour-long ﬂight landed at the recently opened
airstrip outside the unattractive mining town of
Uyuni. A driver and guide were waiting and we set
off in the Land Cruiser, quickly passing through the
town of Colchani, a cluster of adobe houses where
most of the salt gatherers who work in the desert live.
Geological studies have found the salt is up to 120m
deep in places; in total the Salar contains an estimated
lObn tonnes, ofwhich 25,000 tonnes are extracted
annually.

We drove out on to the surface of the salt pan — ﬂat
but cracked into a billion naturally occurring hexagon
shapes. Its appearance can change dramatically: in dry
conditions the surface can look like snow or ice while

at night it glows with reﬂected moonlight; when wet it
takes on the appearance of a colossal mirror fringed by
distant, snow-capped peaks.

After two hours’ driving, we made our ﬁrst stop
at Incahuasi, the remains of a volcanic cone that now

looks like a small rocky island rising out from the

salt, about 45 miles west of Colchani. The Salar was
formed some 30,000 years ago by the drying up ofa
vast prehistoric lake, Lago Minchin, and Incahuasi’s
rocks show traces of seashells and coral. Its slopes are
dotted with thousand-year-old cacti, and as I climbed
up among them with my guide Ivan Blanco we began
to pant in the thinning air. The View from the summit,
100 or so metres above the surface of the salt sea, is
astounding. “Look around,” said Blanco. “I’d venture
to say that this is the last truly virgin spot on Earth.”

It’s easy to see his point but, nevertheless, the
island is a stopping point for most tours of the Salar
and can get busy with day-trippers, so we pressed
on farther into the wilderness. We drove north for
another hour, to the camp where Morgan and his
Airstream were waiting for us.

“This is the loneliest spot ofthe salty desert — and
it is all here just for you,” said Morgan, as we prepared
to eat a dinner of juicy roast llama steak, served with
some decent Bolivian red wine from the southern
region of Tarija, under an umbrella in the middle of
the desert.

The next morning, from the comfort of my warm
bed, Iwitnessed an orange dawn lighting up one ofthe
most extraordinary landscapes I have ever seen. Soon
after, the ever-courteous chef, Isaac Quispe, knocked
on the door, bringing freshly squeezed orange and
pineapple juices and sweet papayas served alongside
fresh coffee, all produce coming from Bolivia’s western
Amazon basin. He left quickly, telling me: “The idea
is to leave the traveller completely alone, so you can
enjoy the experience the way you want. So, please,
excuse me.”

But there are beneﬁts beyond solitude. Having
a mobile base makes it easier to explore the area —

8Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

ekking across remote parts of the salt ﬂats, “For us, the salt ﬂats are almost sacred,” said Doﬁa

j ' or U . . .
1 . I  local Communities or climbing the volcanoes Lupe, an Aymaran elder wearing a bowler hat and
In VISItS edges pleated skirt, who owns a humble but comfortable
. atl drove north to the tiny villages of Jirira eight—room hotel made of salt bricks in Jirira. “We

20 Later We .
d Coqneza in the shadow of Thunupa, the extinct
an

volcano that looms over the salt pan.

would like more people to be able to feel that.”

Andres Schipani, www.ft.com

Evaluation

Once you have completed your commentary, it is important that you consider what
you have done effectively and what you need to do to improve your weaker points.
In order to do this, look at the table. Read each skill carefully and then make a
judgement about whether you have mastered it, or if it needs more work.
If you need to revisit key skills or areas of knowledge, use the ﬁnal column to
ﬁnd the relevant section of the book. Go to that section, and reread it, or try out the
activities a second time.

Skill

I was able to follow a clear process and complete
the task in the time set.

I was able to group words and see patterns.

I had an introduction which had a focus that guided
my commentary as a whole.

u < ‘j-‘m‘ﬂu Argus-w .‘ _

I used the point/quotation/comment process
effectively.

I expressed my ideas fluently and coherently rather
than as a list of disconnected items.

I was able to comment on the connotations of
particular words and phrases.

 

65Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

In this unit, you will explore the types of writing, purposes and forms which you
might meet in an exam situation: in directed writing tasks and when writing for a ‘
speciﬁed audience.

However, whatever the task, much of your writing of non—ﬁction will beneﬁt
from the skills you developed in reading non—ﬁction. This is true both of exam
responses which expect you to build on passages you have read, as well as those
you have to write without a stimulus text. By reading and exploring a wide range ‘
of non-ﬁction texts, from modern newspaper articles to personal travel accounts or i
promotional brochures, you will encounter a variety of skills and techniques which
you can apply to your own writing.

 

 

Approaching ‘directed writing’ questions

In this section you will learn:

 

I what the different sorts of non-ﬁction tasks are
I how to identify and extract the key information from them.

What is a ‘directed writing’ task?
A directed writing task is a piece of writing based on either:

n I the style and language of the original passage

or
I the material of the original passage.
‘Directed writing’ may involve:

I adapting a piece of writing for a similar task, but maybe with a different context,
using the same language and style I
I rewriting a passage with a different purpose and/or Viewpoint (for example,
from the perspective of a different character mentioned in the passage) using the
same material.

In an exam situation you will be asked to write between 120 and 150 words for a
directed writing task.

Same style, different context

Tasks might ask you to remain ‘in role’ as the same speaker or writer of the original
passage, keeping a similar style and language, but changing the topic, focus or
content of the writing. Here is a typical task:

Thefollowing text isfrom an online promotionfor an adventure trek by pony in
South America. The same company decides to organise a trek, using a diﬁerent
means of transport, in your own country.

Write the opening (120—150 words)for this promotion. Base your answer closely on
the style and language ofthe original text.

From this, (even though we cannot see the original text) you can see that the task
tells you: