Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

A On the whole, this is an easy-to-read passage in which the writer
uses short and long sentences to good effect. It is a direct and
descriptive account of how an animal was shot. The writer lets the
readers get acquainted with the scene and the atmosphere. The
writer uses ifclauses which add variety.

u.|
m
z
0
n.
W
Lu
a:
u
_l
n.
E
<
V)

 

B Orwell gives a direct, straightforward account in broadly
chronological order, establishing the setting and then the events
that ensue. He demonstrates the thought-processes he went
through at the time, using ifclauses to consider the consequences
of what he might do, for example, saying lfhe charged, Icould
shoot... to explain how the situation would be taken out of his
hands.

ACTIVITY 1.4

1 On your own, based on the relevant success criteria on page 6:

I note down which of the success criteria are evident

I decide which of the responses is more effective

I decide what is wrong with, or could be improved in, the other response.
2 Once you have done this, compare your ideas with a partner.

I Did you agree on which extract was better and why?

I What two important things, in particular, should have been done?

Highlighting or listing key words or phrases

Passages of writing contain an enormous variety of possibilities which you can
choose to comment on. In fact, you could probably comment on every single word
or phrase! However, this is not practical, nor desirable. By highlighting or listing
key words and phrases you will be able to interact with the text, however dense and
complex it might ﬁrst appear, and focus on key patterns or features that create the
tone or mood.

You will be looking at how to plan and structure responses to texts later in this
unit but ﬁrst, read the extract below. The annotations in the ﬁrst four paragraphs
provide an idea of the sorts of aspects you might draw from a text.

I never met my grandfather. He died nine years to the day before I was
born. What I knew of him was pieced together from conversations with my
grandmother...

We gathered in her garden on the day of her funeral, steeling ourselves
against the encroaching sadness of ﬁnal farewell. I left the stilted conversation
that caged in our grief and walked through her house, drinking in every detail
of a place I would never see again. I paused in front of an old cedar—wood
bookcaSe Where my grandmother had arranged her most prized photos. Amid
all the weddings, Christmas dinners, birthdays, graduations, grandchildren

 

€13Cambridge International AS Level English Language

and great-grandchildren were pictures of Bryan. They were sundry keepsakes
of a life of staggering high achievement.

Here was Bryan at the foot of a satellite whose construction he oversaw,
moments before a rocket launched it into outer space; here he was in a
park in Leningrad at the height of the Cold War, the delegate representing
Australia at an international space conference; here he was in Maralinga, the

 

distinguished scientist observing the atomic-bomb tests; here he posed for his
ofﬁcial photograph as director of Australia’s Antarctic Division; and here he

was looking like Errol Flynnl, the decorated squadron leader with moustache
W- V
I had never felt as remote from my grandfather as I did at that moment.
There were no photos of him holding a baby or laughing with his children or ‘ '
smiling with his bride on his wedding day. He was on his own in all of them, .
but for one exception. E
The photo was smaller than the others, discreetly placed at the edge of 
the bookcase. It captured my grandfather later in his life standing shoulder- 
to-shoulder with a man of similar age and proportions, both of them dressed 
in dark suits and ties. A wintry background of leaﬂess trees and cloudy 
sky scarcely dimmed the quiet enthusiasm each man exuded in the other’s 

 

 

company. I picked it up in the hope that closer inspection might put a 

grandmother had scrawled a name in pencil: Hiram Cassedy.
Cassedy. The very sight of the name called forth images formed in my ,

youth. In my mind’s eye, I could see a party of emaciated castaways covered in  1 

tropical ulcers gathered on a beach, a full moon lighting up the crashing surf. ‘ t

A bare-chested Timorese man moves among the group clutching a ﬁstful of

Dutch guilders. A radioman, malaria-ravaged and undernourished, crouches ,

alongside an enormous transceiver, frantically scribbling an encoded message : F
' on the back of a corn leaf. Nearby, a cruciﬁx fashioned from palm branches
tilts at an angle above a freshly dug grave. And, standing slightly apart — his
face bearded and gaunt, his clothes torn and ﬁlthy — is my grandfather. In one
hand, he clasps a letter sent from the Japanese Army demanding surrender;
in the other, he holds a torch. Later that night, my grandfather would meet ,
Hiram Cassedy, the lynchpin in an event that most believed deﬁned my 
grandfather’s life and some thought ended it prematurely.

The photo I held was taken years later, on the occasion of his second
encounter with Cassedy. It was a rare souvenir honouring a rescue mission of
such implausibility that the Allies covered it up in the hope of using it again.
When the press eventually reported the event, the story was lost in a war ﬁlled
with like tales of bravery, heroism and despair.

I placed the photo back in its frame and drew it close. The key to
understanding my grandfather lay at the heart of this photo and in
understanding the event it commemorated. I placed it back on the bookcase
and returned to my grieving family. That was when I decided to go to Timor.

 

 

From Rescue at21.00 Hours by Tom Trumble.

'"p 1 Errol Flynn swashbuckling actor from the 19305 to 19505 

It        V ., ,V V . V V _ _ ... VV V V V V ., , V .V _, _ V _ V..." F. "x... ..m ink”. .V-~~ JiAvWMBudwry/HivkuiV-‘
effect of particular language

features, devices or patterns
when you comment on a text
otherwise your comments
will reveal little of the mood

ortone.Unit 1: Reading non—fiction

 

2 Now have a go yourself. Read the extract again including the second,
unannotated part. Using the ﬁrst four paragraphs as a model, list key
words or phrases that stand out to you.

These might include any of the following:

particularly Vivid descriptions (perhaps adjectives and nouns)
repetitions of words/phrases or patterns of language

groups of similar or related words

contrasting or juxtaposed ideas or phrases

imagery, symbols or other forms of ﬁgurative language

changes in tone or focus.

3 Once you have done this, choose one or two of these aspects and make
your own notes about what they reveal about the writer and his tone. Make
sure you are able to:

l relate what you say to the words or phrases you have listed

I refer to the eﬂect of these words or phrases on the reader and the mood
conveyed.

Evaluating commentary skills

TIP

Being aware of things to
avoid can be as useful as
remembering what you
should do when answering
passage-based questions.

 

What makes a good commentary? While no two commentaries on a text should
be the same and while each should reﬂect the student’s own interpretation and
‘take’ on the text, there are key skills that everyone should apply, as indicated by the
success criteria on page 6.

Now read this task and the passage that follows it:

1 The passage below describes the writer’s experience in Burma when he was
serving as a police oﬁ‘icer at a time when the British ruled the country. He has
been ordered to deal with a possible threat posed by an elephant.

(a) Comment on the style and language of the passage.

Cambridge international AS and A Level English Language 8693 Paper 1(May/June 2009), Qla.

But I did not want to shoot the elephant. Iwatched
him beating his bunch of grass against his knees, with
that preoccupied grandmotherly air that elephants
have. It seemed to me that it would be murder to shoot
him. At that age Iwas not squeamish about killing
animals, but I had never shot an elephant and never
wanted to. (Somehow it always seems worse to kill a
large animal). Besides, there was the beast’s owner to
be considered. Alive, the elephant was worth at least

a hundred pounds; dead, he would only be worth the
value of his tusks, ﬁve pounds, possibly. But I had got
to act quickly. I turned to some experienced-looking
Burmans who had been there when we arrived, and
asked them how the elephant had been behaving. They
all said the same thing: he took no notice of you if you

left him alone, but he might charge if you went too
close to him. ’

It was perfectly clear to me what I ought to do. I
ought to walk up to within, say, twenty-ﬁve yards of
the elephant and test his behaviour. If he charged, I
could shoot; if he took no notice of me, it would be safe
to leave him until the mahout1 came back. But also
I knew that I was going to do no such thing. I was a
poor shot with a riﬂe and the ground was soft mud into
which one would sink at every step. If the elephant
charged and I missed him, I should have about as
much chance as a toad under a steam-roller.

There was only one alternative. I shoved the
cartridges into the magazine and lay down on the road
to get a better aim. The crowd grew very still, and a
deep, low, happy sigh, as of people who see the theatre
curtain go up at last, breathed from innumerable
throats. They were going to have their bit of fun after
all. The riﬂe was a beautiful German thing with cross—

VWAWM)W-WWMWWWMNWWWWW‘Wwymau'var“hair sights. I did not then know that in shooting an
elephant one would shoot to cut an imaginary bar
running from ear-hole t0 ear—hole. I ought, therefore,
as the elephant was sideways on, to have aimed
straight at his ear-hole; actually I aimed several inches
in front of this, thinking the brain would be further
forward.

When I pulled the trigger I did not hear the bang
or feel the kick — one never does when a shot goes
home — but I heard the devilish roar ofglee that went
up from the crowd. In that instant, in too short a time,
one would have thought, even for the bullet to get
there, a mysterious, terrible change had come over
the elephant. He neither stirred nor fell, but every line
of his body had altered. He looked suddenly stricken,
shrunken, immensely old, as though the frightful
impact of the bullet had paralysed him without
knocking him down. At last, after what seemed a long
time — it might have been ﬁve seconds, I dare say — he
sagged ﬂabbily to his knees. His mouth slobbered. An
enormous senility seemed to have settled upon him.
One could have imagined him thousands ofyears old.
I ﬁred again into the same spot. At the second shot he
did not collapse but climbed with desperate slowness
to his feet and stood weakly upright, with legs sagging
and head drooping. I ﬁred a third time. That was
the shot that did for him. You could see the agony
ofit jolt his whole body and knock the last remnant
of strength from his legs. But in falling he seemed
for a moment to rise, for as his hind legs collapsed
beneath him he seemed to tower upward like a huge

1 mahout an elephant ownerorkeeper

ACTIVITY 1.6

1 Discuss with a partner:

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

rock toppling, his trunk reaching Skyward like a tree.
He trumpeted, for the ﬁrst and only time. And then
down he came, his belly towards me, with a crash that
seemed to shake the ground even where I lay.

I got up. The Burmans were already racing past
me across the mud. It was obvious that the elephant
would never rise again, but he was not dead. He was
breathing very rhythmically with long rattling gasps,
his great mound ofa side painfully rising and falling.
His mouth was wide open — I could see far down into
caverns ofpale pink throat. I waited a long time for
him to die, but his breathing did not weaken. Finally
I ﬁred my two remaining shots into the spot where
I thought his heart must be. The thick blood welled
out of him like red velvet, but still he did not die. His
body did not even jerk when the shots hit him, the
tortured breathing continued without a pause. He
was dying, very slowly and in great agony, but in some
world remote from me where not even a bullet could
damage him further. I felt that I had got to put an end
to'that dreadful noise. It seemed dreadful to see the
great beast lying there, powerless to move and yet
powerless to die, and not even to be able to ﬁnish him.
I sent back for my small riﬂe and poured shot after
shot into his heart and down his throat. They seemed
to make no impression. The tortured gasps continued
as steadily as the ticking ofa clock.

In the end I could not stand it any longer and went
away.

From Shooting an Elephant by George Orwell.

I What happens in the passage?
I What do you ﬁnd particularly effective or striking about the account?

I What kinds of things might you write about if commenting on the style
and language?
2 Now read this sample response to the task. As you read it, consider to what
extent it meets the success criteria for such a response.Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

This is an easy~to—read passage in which the writer describes how an
animal was shot. The writer lets the readers get acquainted with the
scene and the atmosphere. Shooting the elephant was like something
he was forced to do. He thought it would be like doing murder to kill the
elephant itself. As the passage goes on he begins to care less. His first
feelings go away and his worry about killing the animal goes away. He
was now obsessed with getting the animal to die. He is confused about
what he should do and the elephant could be a possible threat. The
police officer was still not that old and unsure what kind of things he
should do at this point. He is over-reacting and behaving in a not very
good way for a police officer.

The writer uses stream of consciousness to describe a memory as
seen through a first person view. This can be seen in the way in which the
word / is used several times in the opening sentences. The writer uses
various literary devices and metaphorical tools. For example, in the first
paragraph, the author uses a metaphor in comparing the elephant to
someone with a grandmother/y air. The alliteration of beating his bunch
creates the harsh mood at thestart and there is a sense of the same idea
in the way that the author uses the repetition of never and never in order
to show his state of mind.

The almost anaphoric contrast between alive and dead stands
out to also show the way the officer was thinking. He is unsure about
killing the animal and uses parenthesis around a sentence to show his
inner thought. There are also simple sentences which show his inner
thoughts and these are placed alongside longer complex sentences
which show the action going on outside his stream of consciousness.
The punctuation also adds to the dramatic effect. Commas come after
certain words to create tension and suspense: killing animals, but...
Besides, there  Alive, dead, 

The point of view of the passage is first person and we see things
through the eyes ofthe writer. The diary dictated style gives an insight
into the police officer’s thoughts. Yet there are also outside sources,
which give another perspective to the first-person point of view. There
were experienced—looking Burmons and also there was the beast’s
owner to be considered. Besides that there was the excited crowd. While
the police officer’s thoughts come first, an atmosphere is created by
inserting other people’s actions and position.

Throughout the passage the author uses many metaphors and
similes to good effect. The figurative language gives a more entertaining
feel to the passage and helps the reader participate as if one is actually
witnessing the events as they happen. The reader is fascinated as they
hear the happysigh and witness the blood that flowed in the simile
like red velvet. The passage contains many such descriptive details,
which help bring the story to life. The reader can visualise the agony
the elephant went through and the excitement of the rather bored and
aggressive crowd. With the use of many similes, it implies that the officer
feels guilt.

LU
U)
2
O
D.
W
Lu
D:
Lu
_I
Q.
E
<
V)

   

 KEVTERMS

 

Discuss with a partner:

I What works well and
what doesn’t work in this
response?

I Which success criteria
have not been met?

I What single thing do
you feel would most have
improved the response?

11Cambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

 

 

comment or further explanation of the point you have made. You will learn more

V ' 't for . . . . . . .
see page 17 Ofthls um about how to use this technique in a later section of this unit. As a ﬁrst practice of

more about how to use the

point/quotation/comment this skill, write one or two sentences about the passage with one aspect of the style
technique. mentioned here — the use of metaphor to describe the elephant.
Try to:

I say something about what the use of grandmotherly conveys about the writer’s
feelings towards the elephant

I link this with any other way in which the elephant is described later in the passage.

TIP , , . .
Get into the habit of regularly The writers use ofa metaphor to describe the way the elephant behaves With a

selecting articles or reports (grandmomerly air’suggem that 

from reputable publications
and readingthem with an summary
‘exam head’ on — in other

words, analysing them for
style and language as much as I Non-ﬁction writing shares many similarities with ﬁction writing.
for what they have to say.

Remember these key points from this section:

I The reading and analysis skills you develop for commentary will help your own
writing.

 

I Highlighting, listing or annotating key words and phrases in a text is an
essential part of commentary.

I . The best responses to texts always support the points made with apt, direct
quotations.

I These should always be explained in terms of their effect on tone, mood or the
perspective of the writer.

 

Planning and structuring a commentary

In this section, you will:

I learn how to read and plan your response
I select key words to help shape your introduction and response
I learn how diﬁerent introductions can focus on different elements in the text.

It is important to have a mental or actual plan of how your commentary will be
organised. Without it, you may spend too long on one aspect and not enough on
another.

A process for response
In order to respond to a passage effectively, you should follow this guidance.

1 Read the passage closely at least twice.
Why? The first reading should be to get the overall sense of the
passage, what happens and how it all fits together. The second will
allow you to focus on the way the passage works, the specific language
style and the mood created.

2 Divide the passage into equal sections. This can be done quite easily
if the paragraphs are of regular and fairly equal length. Ifthey are not
of equal length, then divide the passage into roughly equal sections
based on dividing the number of lines into, say, four parts.

Why? In this way, you will give equal attention to the different sections.

63Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

3 Divide the time you have to write about the extract into, say, four equal
sections, too, so that you can give equal attention to each part of the
passage.

Why? Often, candidates write impressive material about the first part of
an extract but you need to ensure that you deal with all the passage —
especially the conclusion — in the same depth.

4 Make a list of key words and phrases (no longer than six or seven
words).
Why? You cannot write about everything, but you do need some
particularly powerful, vivid or meaningful words or phrases to hang
your key ideas around. You may wish to colour-code words and phrases
which seem to be related to each other.

5 Plan your response.
Why? Even if you do not have time to write out a plan, mentally you
need to considerthe structure of your response. You have a list of key
words/phrases and you have divided up the passage, but you also need
to consider your own writing. You can, of course, write one paragraph
on point of view, one on the use of imagery to convey the setting, etc.
However it is probably better to plan to show the progression of the
passage. This is the way it develops and unfolds and this approach
allows you to:

I comment on similarities and contrasts within the passage
I show how attitudes develop or change 13
I explain how focuses shift from one thing, person or place to another.

"P What kind of words or phrases should you list?
Remember that you are not

expected to comment on
eVerything! I suggest a particular mood or attitude of the writer at that point in the passage

You should make a list of words or phrases that:

seem to suggest certain qualities or ideas

I
I seem to echo others in the extract
I seem to contrast with others in the extract
I

you can use for your introduction.

 

How should you use the words and phrases you have listed?
Focus on the following four ideas: :l

I what voice or perspective is exempliﬁed through these selected words?
I what is the passage or writer implying or what kind of message is being given? 
I what relationships and/or social positions in the passage are presented and how 

do they change or develop, if at all?

   

I what contexts are shown? Are they, for example, cultural, social, economic, I
geographical or historical? 

 

Sometimes all four of these ideas might apply, sometimes two or just one. You
should prioritise them according to the passage. These ideas will form the basis for 1
your introduction/overview and the framework for your analysis as a whole. ‘

ECambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

 

Imagine you have been given the following task and need to plan your
response. For the purposes of this practice, you have 45 minutes for the plan and
the writing. You are not going to write the commentary, this is about how you
would approach it.

Comment on the ways in which language and style are used in thefollowing extract
to persuade readers to visit Kenya.

Remember, you will need to follow this process:

Read the extract twice.
Divide the passage into equal sections — perhaps three or four.
This is the ﬁrst part of the
process. Read the following
text twice. It is an extract
from a website advertising a

Divide the time you have equally (so, perhaps 12—15 minutes on each part).
List your key words or phrases.
Colour—code or link any of these according to contrast/similarity/use, etc.

Decide how you will approach your response. (Will you write one paragraph on
your ﬁrst section?)

destination in Africa. Then
complete the rest of the
planning process — the other
stages in the list.

When you have ﬁnished
reading and planning,
evaluate how well you dealt
with the task.

I Did you do all the parts
of the process that were
recommended?

I Were you able to select
enough key words and
phrases?

I Would your planning
make you feel conﬁdent
enough to answer the set
task? If not, what do you
need to do better?

The coastline south ofMombassa is a tropical paradise
of palm fringed white sand beaches, where the
turquoise waters of the Indian Ocean meet beautiful
coral reefs. The protective reefs have created ideal
beaches with calm, inviting waters.

Days are ﬁlled with sunshine and nights are balmy
and warm with gentle sea breezes. The offshore
reefs are alive with coral, myriad ﬁsh, sea turtles and
dolphins. Both outer and inner reef walls offer world
class diving with spectacular coral gardens and drop
offs. At Kisite»Mpunguti, a Marine Reserve has been
established around beautiful Wasini Island, an ideal
day trip for divers and snorkellers.

 

The beaches are bordered by lush green coastal
rainforests with proliﬁc birdlife and variety of wildlife
including baboons, rare colobus monkeys and even
leopard. A wide range of World Class resorts, centred
around Diani Beach, allow Visitors to relax and enjoy
this natural paradise with the best standards of
accommodation, service and cuisine.

The south coast also has many smaller quiet
getaways such as T iwi Beach, ideal for travellers
looking for a low key break. Inland, the fertile
hinterland of Kwale District consists of small
villages inhabited by the Wakamba, Digo and
Duruma tribes.

®Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

Further south, the small ﬁshing village of Shimoni Whether you are looking for a base to actively
is home to a series of deep, mysterious coastal caves explore this fascinating region, or just somewhere
that stretch from the sea to deep into the jungles. to unwind and ﬁnd peace, Kenya’s south coast has
Historically, these caves were long used as a refuge everything you could wish for.

for Dhow Sailors and explorers. Shimoni is also an
excellent base for big game ﬁshing in the waters of the

pemba Channel.

Kenya Tourist Board

Further practice

If you wish to, write the commentary based on the process you completed.
Alternatively, come back to the passage after you have worked on the skills in the
rest of this section.

Introductions to commentaries

Now that you have considered how to plan for your commentary, it is time to deal
with a commentary itself.

Your response should begin with a brief introduction to the passage so that
an overview or framework is established. It is the framework outlined in this
introduction which shapes the analysis of the piece. The words and phrases you
select when planning will help shape your overall interpretation of the passage and
can help shape your introduction.

Read this new introduction to the commentary based on the Orwell passage on

Page 9- 15
>.
E The writer gives a direct, straightforward account in broadly
E chronological order, establishing the setting and then trying to make
'3' sense of the events that ensue. However, he seems to be out of place
2 in the world he finds himself in. His feelings forthe elephant appear
8 not only to be fighting against his own conscience but also against the

contrasting and alien emotions ofthe crowd. As a result, he struggles to
come to terms with his situation on both a practical and mental level.

This works well because:

I it is brief — four to ﬁve lines long

where it talks about purpose it does so in a general way which does not close
down other possibilities

it does not use any quotations or unnecessary linguistic terminology
it tries to offer an overview/interpretation of the entire extract

it looks for some sort of contrast or development

it does not fall into the trap of offering one ﬁnal and ﬁxed interpretation — words
such as seems and appears are carefully used. As you begin your answer, you
may not be aware of things that become clearer to you the more you study and
write about the extract. Such words allow for some ﬂexibility as your answer
unfolds.