Unit 7: Child language acquisition

 

TIP

The greater your awareness
‘of language acquisition by

babies and young children,
the more confident you will
become at recognising stages
and assessing the strength of
theories.

 

questions, and outsiders can follow what they are saying as their conversation is
generally clear in spite of errors with more complex structures.

At any time from infancy onwards, young children are likely to experience
the wider world in the form of pre-school or nursery education. As well as
meeting a range of new Children and adults to communicate with, they will be
exposed to an extraordinary breadth of new language and conversations. Pre-
school children rarely play together in the style of primary children (they play

alongside each other) but language is still exchanged and so their language world is
broadened.

As emphasised earlier, exact ages vary from child to child, but in general, by the
age of ﬁve, children can do the following:

I converse effortlessly in the majority of situations
I understand and articulate complex language structures and tenses

I use the conditional tense: this requires the understanding of an element of
possibility or uncertainty (e.g. If it stops raining we could go to the park.)
I understand abstract ideas as well as idioms

I take part in conversations — though they may still only be interested in
conversations about themselves!

They have come a long way from their early babbles and coos, and are set to become
full linguistic participants in their world.

ACTIVITY 7.4

What linguistic features are evident in the following brief conversation?
Six—year—old Eesha is cross with her father.

‘EESHA dad you are so immature
DAD me
EESHA I’m mature; I’m six

Read the transcriptions of two conversations and the commentary, which provides
a brief overview of both. Choose one of the conversations and analyse closely the
language skills of the child.

The children in these two conversations are hothfouryears old.

Conversation 1

ILHAM I made this picture for you (1)
MOTHER what is it

ILHAM it’s a tiger

MOTHER it’s a tiger

ILHAM I thought you liked tigers
MOTHER I love tigers

ILHAM that’s why I made you one
MOTHER it looks like a tiger too

259TIP

Within clear ethical limits,
try to observe babies with
their caregivers (often, but
by no means exclusively,

the mother) and the ways in
which they communicate.
Remember this will not only
be by the spoken word but
by smiles, cuddles and other
body language.

 

Cambridge International A Level English Language

ILHAM you can put it anywhere in your room

MOTHER

I’ll put it on the wall, thanks for drawing me this lovely picture
Ilham

Conversation 2

MALAKAI

can I buy those cars that are on TV

GRANDMA yes with your own money you can buy whatever you want

MALAKAI

but I don’t have any money

GRANDMA well I suppose that means that you can’t buy those cars

MALAKAI

well then you buy them for me

GRANDMA but I don’t have much money or a job

MALAKAI

I know I’ll give you a job

GRANDMA what’s myjob

MALAKAI a driver (.) driving toys and cars

E

E in both of the conversations the four-year-olds are entirely comfortable
5 with the conventions of turn—taking and are able to introduce and

2 change topics. They are talking to family members whom they know

5 well and the topics relate to the children’s areas of interest — painting a
u

tiger and wanting more toys. The children are focused in their own world
and interests. They are able to move from concrete issues ofdrawing
and buying toys to more imaginative areas such as the mother’s interest
in monsters or the grandmother’s newjob of driving toys and cars (the
latter proposition is a little unclear!).

Both children are fluent and articulate; they are able to pronounce
words clearly and are using questions and statements with adverbials
(well) as well as appropriate tenses (/ thoughtyou liked) and ellipsis (I’ll
giveyou).

Both four-yeaerlds are able to sustain the conversations. They have
no difficulty in responding and are well on'the way to conversational
competence.

ACTIVITY 7.5

Read the following extract and the accompanying commentary which will
help you to analyse some features of language acquisition for children of this
age. Then, after seeking permission, transcribe a short conversation between

a caregiver and child. Analyse the language used by the child and note the
types of errors they make.Unit 7: Child language acquisition

 

Joelle, aged 27 months, is having a conversation with her mother while they look
at a hook together.

JOELLE

MOTHER

JOELLE
MOTHER

JOELLE

MOTHER

JOELLE

MOTHER

JOELLE

MOTHER

look  sheeps in ﬁeld (.) two sheep and big sheep.

yes Joelle  look there in the ﬁeld  there’s two lambs  one 

and two  The mother sheep is With them and they’re eating grass
for their supper.

eat grass 0 sheep eat 0
look Joelle  on this page(.) here is the farmer with his tractor

a tractor O a tractor (.) brm brm  big tractor in the ﬁeld with
sheeps (.) over the grass  big tractor  green tractor (.)

that’s right Joelle, the farmer is driving the tractor  but it’s a big
red tractor (.) and the sheep are in the ﬁeld. Let’s turn the page
and see what else the farmer has on his farm (.) what can you see

there  look

[shouting] ducks ducks on pond  ducks on pond swim ducks

You and I fed the ducks on the pond last week didn’t we O we
gave them bread (.) you gave them bread and they were hungry (.)
they ate it all up and said ‘quack quack’ thank you Joelle

ducks quack quack  on pond big ducks on pond  n0 bread

you’re right Joelle, the ducks in the story don’t have any bread 
do you think the farmer will give them any