Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

I it does not focus on audience — as this is not something referred to in the

 

original task.

You may wish to referto - ' ( ,
this example as you write The introduction works particularly well because the 1ntr0duct10n sets up what the

introductions in response to commentary might focus on:
other extracts in the book.

I the sense of cultural contexts meeting (being out of place in the world the writer
ﬁnds himself in)

ACTIVITY 1'9 I his relationships in the extract (with the elephant and with the crowd).

Write your own introduction
to the commentary on the
Kenya tourism passage on
page 14. You can keep it

and then have another go
once you have completed
more work on writing
introductions.

Different types of introduction

The focus you choose for your introduction can reﬂect the focus of your
commentary.
Read two more introductions to commentaries on the Orwell passage:

A The writer seems to explore the contrasting attitudes of the police
officer. Initially, the officer seems aware that he has a job to do,
although there is some reluctance on his part to do so. However, as
the extract develops, this underlying reluctance seems to grow in
strength and undermine his professional approach to the situation
and eat away at his very conscience.

U)
E
D:
E
2
Lu
2
z
0
U

 

B In the extract the writer seems to begin with a negative and
ﬂ almost hostile attitude towards the task he has been given. He
appears to be at war with himself mentally, his instincts battling
his conscientious sense of duty as a police officer. As the passage
develops this struggle becomes even more intense and the officer
views the experience with increasing horror and revulsion, with a
sense ofdisbelief at what he has seen and done.

ACTIVITY 1.10
TIP

You can use conjunctions or Which of these two introductions:

adverbials such as However, .
as  develops etc. to Signal I suggests the Shootmg an Elephant passage develops and becomes more and

your use of contrasting or more powerful in terms of the feelings experienced by the writer?

additional ideaS- They can I suggests there is a marked contrast between the writer/ofﬁcer’s feelings at

also gUide how you diVide the start and at the end?
yourcommentary. For

example, in introduction
A, however could signal
the second part ofthe Summary

commentaW- Remember these key points from this section:

 

l Plan your response to the passage in the methodical way you have learned.

 

l Select words and phrases from the passage which will help to shape your
response.

I Write an introduction which uses its focus to help set the framework for the
commentary.The way you express your
ideas must not become a
list of unconnected PQCs
(point, quotation, comment)
followed by more PQCs.

Do not allow your use
ofthe PQC structure to
become robotic and list-like.
Use connectives and other
cohesive devices such as
pronouns (they/it etc) or
demonstratives (that, those,
this etc) to make your writing
fluent and to link your points
together.

 

 
  

TIP

Use modal verbs such as
could, should, might, would
to help you suggest ideas
in a non-definitive way.
For example, consider the
difference between, This

means  and This might
mean...

  
 
     
 
    
     
 

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

Using evidence and quotations

In this section you will:

I learn how to analyse speciﬁc language features and explain their effects
I quote effectively and selectively.

Being able to select speciﬁc language features or devices, quote directly from the

text and explain or analyse their effect in a ﬂuent way, is fundamental to successful
commentary.

Point/quotation/comment

In the previous section, you looked at how selecting speciﬁc words and phrases
could guide your interpretation of a passage and help to structure your response.

However, you also need an approach to these words and phrases that allows you to
comment on them and explain their effects.

One simple way of doing this is to follow this sequence:

I Make a POINT.
I Support it with a QUOTATION.

I Explain or develop it with a COMMENT, usually on the effect created orthe
meaning suggested.

I Connect or link your point with other points or observations you make.

When writing your commentary, you should ensure that you avoid:

I ' using quotations as a substitute for your own words. For example: ‘We see in
this extract that the ofﬁcer is going to shoot an elephant but he does not want to.
He feels that it would he murder to shoot him and he realises he had never shot
an elephant. He also realises that there was the heast’s owner to he considered
and this creates a problem for him’. This kind of material is really just another
form of paraphrase or narrative summary of the content of the extract.

I relying on phrases such as this means, the writer explains or this tells us.

You will end up offerng a kind of translation of the quoted word or phrase
rather than commenting upon it. You may also suggest there is only one ‘right’
meaning to a selected phrase; it is better to suggest your ideas.

I comments which rely on vague generalisation. Try not to use phrases like this
draws the reader in, this makes the reader want to read on, or this engages the
reader. These phrases tend to lead nowhere and could be applied to almost any
word or phrase used in the extract!

In order to avoid these pitfalls, you may ﬁnd it helpful to use the following phrases
to introduce ideas:

This suggests 

This evokes a sense of...
This conveys 

This implies 

This conjures up 

This establishes a sense of. ..

17Cambridge International AS Level En

glish Language

 

Applying the skills

Here is another example of a response to the Orwell passage on page 9.
Examples of point/quotation/comment are highlighted in the ﬁrst paragraph.

Lu
U)
2
O
D.
U)
Lu
(K
m
.1
D.
E
4:
U)

 

ACTIVITY 1.11

1 With a partner, read the unannotated remainder of

the response and identify:

I all the other examples of the point/qu
comment approach

I any examples where the writer (of the

commentary) has used linking or contrasting
words or phrases to emphasise or develop points.

2 Now look at these notes made by the same student

about Orwell’s attitude to what he has to
I Copy and complete the table opposite

The first paragraph seems to introduce a sense of indecision and a
conflict between private and public responsibilities at once. The writer
is directly honest about the problems he is facing [point], accepting that
he has a negative attitude towards the issue placed before him — But/ did
not want to shoot the elephant [quotation] — which immediately appears
to establish a dilemma for him. He is torn between his natural empathy
for the creature and the public role he is expected to follow. The strong
attachment, moreover [linking word], which he has for the animal [point]
is shown by the use of the instead of that elephant or an [quotation]; this
conveys how he considers it an individual, a separate being, instead of
just one of a kind [comment].

This apparently subconscious sense of human attachment is
exemplified further by the grandmother/y air, a rather unusual phrase,
evoking a sense of extreme gentleness and slowness. His internal
dilemma is hinted at by the choice ofthe harsh and stark word murder
which seems to highlight his awareness from the beginning that to
commit such a deed would be a kind of sin. Furthermore, this dilemma is
reinforced by the addition of the single word Besides which suggests that
he is still hesitating, trying to persuade himself against his will.

He is aware of his own ineptitude, the reference to at that age
suggests he is still relatively young for the position he is in. He recognises
that he has to act quickly, suggesting he is aware he might be wasting
time. Indeed, his almost thankful reference to experienced-looking
Burmans could indicate further delaying tactics, as well as implying his
own youthful innocence compared to the knowledge and awareness
they seem to possess.

CIhe second paragraph introduces a more deﬁnite
tone in the use of the phrase ‘perfectly clear’,

Otation/ implying he has moved on from a sense of doubt.

Here are three possible sentence starters to help you:
I The apparent certainty in the repeated phrase,
‘I ought’
I Yet, immediately a sudden change oftack and the
writer’s mood is indicated by 

 

do.

I The vivid simile to explain his dilemma in which he
, adding a

compares his chances to those ofa ‘...’

comment or effect to the last two points.

I ﬂien, take any of the last three points

and turn

them into a longer sentence, like this (the sections

from the table are highlighted):Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

    
    

 
 

I Quote I Comment/effect

perfectly clear lmpLLes a change «From earLLer
sense of doubt.

/ ought  Suggests  confusion
between perate teetbngs
and, public responsbbitttg has
passed.

sudden change of back Bat / also knew / was goo‘ng ImpLLes he is teem/19 
 to do no such thin.

Uses a vbvla smile to explain / should, have about as mach COnvegs a sense of his 
his dilemma. chance as a toad, under a
steam—roller.

 
   

Point
More deﬁnite tone (1nd,

 

     
      
       

     
 

  

Further practice

For further practice of the selection of key words and phrases and the use of
the point/quotation/comment approach, read the ﬁnal text in this section. The
extract describes some of the writer’s feelings when she visited Bolivia in
South America.

But the area is also a spectacular 
place for hiking. We roamed higher, 
over plains of green moss and 
quinoa ﬁelds, among herds of llama 
and alpaca. The world’s highest 
forest grows here and there were 
bubbling multi-coloured geysers and 
hot springs Where we swam down 
peaty channels. And then, one late 
afternoon, as the sky turned purple 
behind the snow—capped volcanos, 

the village suddenly came out. The
boys mounted Wild—looking ponies,
women in frilly shiny skirts began
to dance, and the men got out their
ﬂutes. They all formed a small but
beautiful procession on the cold
muddy streets and we followed them
as they blessed each corner of their
shabby little village for What had
passed that year, and What might lie
ahead.

19

Gemma Bowes, The Guardian.

ACTIVITY 1.12

1 Highlight four or ﬁve key words and phrases which you think are central
to the perspective of the writer and her experiences.

2 Write a paragraph in which you explain what feelings are evoked by the
description and the effects created. You could begin:

There is a sense of movement, energy and freedom that emerges from this
passage. At the start, for example, the travellersCambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Highlight or list key words or phrases with a View to the mood, perspective,
tone and changing eifects across the text.

. I Use the point/quotation/comment approach but in a way that allows for ﬂuent
expression.

I Always comment on the effect of particular words or phrases.

I Use a range of expressions (such as suggest, appears to) or modal forms (might,
could, etc.) to make what you say suggestive rather than deﬁnitive.

TYPES OF NON-FICTION TEXT

Reading or encountering a wide variety of different forms and types of text is vital.
Only by familiarising yourself with the individual styles of dilferent writers will
you be able to deal with an unfamiliar text you are encountering for the ﬁrst time.

As you have already seen, you will come across a range of non—ﬁction texts,
some of which will share features with aspects of ﬁction writing.

Descriptive writing

In this section, you will:

I consider what descriptive writing is
I_ read a range of passages which contain descriptive writing

a . I explore a range of features which are typical of much descriptive writing.

Descriptive writing is a ‘catch—all’ term that seems to encompass many forms
and types of text. You may see descriptive writing in newspaper reports and in
imaginative narratives, but what are the shared conventions and features you
should look out for? Here are some possibilities:

Descriptive writing often:

I tries to create a very particular or vivid mood or atmosphere
I conveys a strong sense of individual settings, people, events or experiences
I focuses in on detail but can also ‘zoom out’ to over—views or panoramas

I draws on a range of sensory experiences, such as taste, sight, sound, touch and
smell.

Examples of descriptive writing might include:

an account of an incident from an expedition across the Antarctic

an advert for a city and its key attractions on a tourist website

a diary entry describing attendance at a World Cup match

a biographical account of a historical event such as the eruptions at Pompeii
a newspaper report of a natural disaster such as a tsunami

a ﬁctional description of a memorable character.

Introducing key aspects of descriptive writing

The following passage exempliﬁes many of the language techniques and elements
we might expect to see in descriptive writing.Part 1

  

  

Vivid visual detail
immediately locates
reader in tent.

I was lying in my sleeping bag, staring at the light ﬁltering through the red
and green fabric of the dome tent. Simon was snoring loudly, occasionally
twitching in his dream world. We could have been anywhere. There is a
peculiar anonymity about being in tents. Once the zip is closed and the
outside world barred from sight, all sense of location disappears. Scotland, the
French Alps, the Karakoram, it was always the same. The sounds of rustling,
of fabric ﬂapping in the wind, or of rainfall, the feel of hard lumos under the
ground sheet, the smell of rancid socks and sweat — these are universals, as
comforting as the warmth of the down sleeping bag.

Outside, in a lightening sky, the peaks would be catching the ﬁrst of the
morning sun, with perhaps even a condor cresting the thermals above the
Filmiggm t_en_t..That wasn’t too fanciful either since I had seen one circling the camp the
from an interior to prevxous afternoon. We were in the middle of the Cordillera Huavhuash, 1n the
exterior Shot. Peruvian Andes, separated from the nearest village by twenty—eight miles of
M rough walking, and surrounded by the most spectacular ring of ice mountains
W I had ever seen, and the only indication of this from within our tent was the

sense _ he cannot regular roaring of avalanches falling off Cerro Sarapo.
actually see the condor I felt a homely affection for the warm security of the tent, and reluctantly
wormed out of my bag to face the prospect of lighting the stove. It had snowed
a little during the night, and the grass crunched frostily under my feet as I

at this point.

W

Geo  h. l f padded over to the cooking rock. There was no sign of Richard stirring as I
g ap lca ’ actual passed his tiny one—man tent, half collapsed and whitened with hoar frost.

2:53:  toghé Whote Squatting under the lee of the huge overhanging boulder that had become
 e emg u'lt Up' our kitchen, I relished this moment when I could be entirely alone. I ﬁddled
with the petrol stove which was mulishly objecting to both the temperature
and the rusty petrol with which I had ﬁlled it. I resorted to brutal coercion
when coaxing failed and sat it atop a propane gas stove going full blast. It
burst into vigorous life, spluttering out two-foot—high ﬂames in petulant revolt
against the dirty petrol.

As the pan of water slowly heated, I looked around at the wide, dry and
rock-strewn river bed, the erratic boulder under which I crouched marking
Camp 6 near Pacchanta in the Andes the site-at a distance in all but the very worst weather. A huge, almost vertical
Mountains, Peru. wall of1ce and snow soared upwards to the summit of Cerro Sarapo directly

   
 
 
  
   

Snoring — the sense of
sound adds to the overall
picture.

  
  

Close detail of individual
items and events draws
all the senses together.

 

 

  
  
  
 
  
  
   
 

 

 

M,»

Long noun phrase uses
several adjectives to
convey the scene’s
majesty.