Cambridge International AS Level English Langu

This week’s restaurant is housed in what, from the
outside, is a lovely hunk of oldness. I want to say
Victorian, but perhaps it’s Georgian. Or older. Or
younger. I don’t know. It’s pretty. What do I know about
architecture? And the mere fact that I am banging on
about the outside of the restaurant, as if standing with
my toe on the threshold, hesitating before taking you
inside, speaks volumes. Can I also say that the people
inside seem nice? Smiley. Rather sweet. Welcoming.
Oh God.

This is tough. Not as tough as it’s going to be
for them to read, but less than easy all the same. I
considered reviewing without naming them; holding
up the faults as ones from which others could learn.
But that, I realised, was a stupid idea. They may be nice
people. They may have their hearts in the right place.
But they are still charging money — £90 for two is not
peanuts — and, after all, who am I writing for?

So come with me then, into the ﬂag-stoned hallway,
which is brightly lit. Not just “Oh, I can see my way”
brightly lit but “Blimey, that’s a bit sharp” brightly lit.
And from there into the “lounge”, which is the last
place you’d want to do such a thing. The lights are up
so high you can see every scuff mark on the walls, every
tatty seam on the oddly positioned dun—coloured sofas.
Young people’s music clatters and bangs off every hard
surface.

We order a couple of “Kia Royals”. It’s viciously
sweet. Then I think: maybe it’s my fault. When what
should be a mix of champagne and a blush of cassis costs
£4 the clue is in the price. One of the staff gets out a
mop and starts slopping down the ﬂoor in the doorway.
Through to the completely empty dining room, which
is equally brightly lit. The music continues to rattle the
lonely glassware. This is a very quiet restaurant. It is
trying. To which I immediately want to add “very”. It

 

age

feels like a place that hasn’t worked out how to do the
thing it wants to do.

The food is a mix of odd and uncertain and not
quite. Sauteed ﬁeld mushrooms come on what feel like
toasted pieces of pre—sliced brown bread. The advertised
smoked stilton — why would you smoke stilton? — makes
no impact. It’s a pile of things, as though cobbled
together from ingredients at the back of the fridge.
Dense cod fritters come on a big, dry pile of garden peas
with hunks of chorizo. There is meant to be a butter
and sage sauce, but there is no sign of it. A main—course
duck dish is brown. Very, very brown: a few squares of
roasted brown root vegetables, a huge brown breaded
mashed potato croquette like a draught excluder, some
slices of overdone brown duck. A brown sauce. It’s a
strange plateful for £17.50. Better are some plaice ﬁllets
with planks of crisp bacon and vast amounts of mash.
We console ourselves with a well-priced bottle of wine.

Desserts are the one clear success. A creme brﬁlée
with Kahlua is a bit solid, but at least you can’t taste the
Kahlua. A pear and almond tart is an expert piece of tart
making. Pastry seems to be something the kitchen is
good at. From time to time someone wanders into the
dining room to ask if everything is all right, but we don’t
want to intrude on private grief by being honest so we
say ﬁne.

This restaurant was chosen for review after much
research. Views were sourced, temperatures taken. The
website looked convincing. I did not want to go to the
obvious places. It was with the best of intentions. The
team here have a lovely site, they really do. But if they
want it to work, they have to change. And they could
start by turning down the lights, before somebody else
comes along and switches them off altogether.

From a review by Jay Rayner, The Observer.

O

 

I mmwn‘xmuas,‘Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

Key technique: evoking thought processes

Writers often use sentence structure and types of sentence (long, short, simple,
complex, etc.) to convey their state of mind. For example, an account of a match
might read:

I wondered ifI was watching the same team I’d seen lastyear. It was bizarre. United
players keptfalling over orpassing to the other team. What was going on? [found
my mind drifting. When was half—time? Oh... they’d scored. The other team, that is.
No surprise there. Timefor my half-time pie and cup oftea.

From this we get a sense of the way the writer’s mind is drifting, uninvolved with
the game. The short questions are unanswered, and when something does happen,
the writer expresses his weary acceptance in a short minor sentence with no verb —
No surprise there — a throwaway line soon replaced by another minor sentence as a
more important thought pops into his mind — pie and cup of tea.

ACTIVITY 1.51

Now read this commentary below on the restaurant review. As you read, ask
yourself:

I Do you agree with the comments made? (e.g. that the writer does not set
himself up as an expert)

I What new or diiferent techniques that you haven’t come across before does
the writer of the commentary draw our attention to?

The review begins with a direct statement suggesting a positive frame
of mind — This week’s restaurant is housed in what, from the outside, is a
lovely hunk ofoldness — conveying a sense ofthe restaurant’s tradition
and solidity in the final words; and yet on closer reading there is a degree
of qualification in the words from the outside, implying that inside may
not sustain this initial impression.

Unlike the other reviews so far, the writer does not set himself up
as an expert. A form of stream of conscious uncertainty begins to take
over and we see the use of short sentences to create an impression
of rapid, alternating thoughts (Or older. Oryounger.), accompanied by
further qualification (perhaps), culminating in doubt (I don’t know.) and
the expression of inner thoughts which seem to move from a degree
of certainty(lt’s pretty) to issues of further uncertainty and confusion (I
don’t know. It’s pretty. What do I know about architecture?  Can / also say
that the people inside seem nice?)

We see the writer’s thoughts progress in terms of syntactical
patterning (This is tough. Not as tough as it’s going to be for them to
read) as word associations and repetitive vocabulary show him making
tentative progress in coming to a decision. Further use of repetitive
syntax seems to confirm the decision he has taken — and the reason
for it; the use of They may... They may . .. they are shows an increasing
degree of certainty and confirmation on his part.

The third paragraph seems to switch to a more inviting and personal
tone as the writer, far from being an expert, assumes we are on the same

>.
E
'—
2
Lu
2
2
O
U

 

0

 

57Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

level as him (So come with me then) now that he has made his decision
and got beyond his doubts. The adjectives in the phrases flag-stoned
and brightly lit suggest an air of solid tradition and a positive atmosphere
once more. However, the register seems to become more colloquial and
critical (Notjust “Oh, I can see my way” brightly [it but “Biimey, that’s a bit
sharp” brightly lit) and the balanced and repetitive syntactical phrasing
of Notjust . .. brightly lit... but brightly [it creates a sense of one view
outweighing another.

Furthermore, the way in which the writer seems to quote the words
of contrast from an actual customer (“Oh, Ican see my way”... “Blimey,
that’s a bit sharp”) again suggest that he is on our level and using the
down—to-earth vocabulary ofthe average customer. if:

The negative atmosphere ofthe interior world or setting, in contrast ‘
to the sense of solid tradition conveyed in the opening sentence of
the review, is expressed by the groups of words (scuff. .. tatty... oddly
positioned) associated with an untidy and disorganised presentation.
The initial impression of the rather harsh lighting is echoed by the
way in which the writer feels music ciatters and bangs offevery hard
surface, words inferring how he feels oppressed by harsh and aggressive
elements.

1 KEY TERMS

 

 

Further practice
a Re-read the last three paragraphs of the review. Comment on the kinds of

techniques and effects the writer employs to express his views.
Look particularly for examples of the following:

a mixture of direct statement and doubt
the use of adjectives
further negative and harsh vocabulary

further use of word associations

 

the use of internal thoughts.

Scripted speeches é , .

Scripted speeches are those that are prepared and written down in advance in
contrast to the kind of spontaneous conversation and dialogue we use in everyday
situations. Scripted speeches may be political speeches or speeches addressed to
particular organisations or gatherings. They may be intended for public mass
audiences or for more local and private meetings. Such speeches:

 

techniques similar to those used in persuasive writing; they may or may not
offer counter-arguments

 

E

W

i
I seek to engage their audience in a range of ways, often with rhetorical 3 f

I tend to offer a particular line or point of View and attempt to persuade listeners
to share their vision

I may try to establish a particular mood, a particular attempt to come to terms
with issues or events or a Vision of the future; they may draw on a range of
techniques to achieve these ends.Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

 

I believe that all the people who have assembled here
have without exception come with the unshakeable
deSire to strive for and win a multi-party democratic
system. In order to arrive at this objective, all the
people should march unitedly in a disciplined manner
towards the goal of democracy...

A number of people are saying that since I have
spent most of my time abroad and am married to a

\ foreignerl could not be familiar with the ramiﬁcations
of this country’s politics. I wish to speak from this
platform very frankly and openly to the people. It
is true that I have lived abroad. It is also true that I
am married to a foreigner. These facts have never
interfered and will never interfere with or lessen my
love and devotion for my country by any measure or
degree.

We must make democracy the popular creed. We
must try to build up a free Burma in accordance with
such a creed. If we should fail to do this, our people
are bound to suffer. If democracy should fail the world

ACTIVITY 1.52

Discuss with a partner:

I What is the main point
that Aung San Suu Kyi
makes in this speech?

I How would you
describe the mode of
address? Is it direct and

straightforward? Or more
subtle and complex?

COMMENTARY

I How can you tell?

Key technique: the direct approach

Some scripted speeches may adopt a plain and direct style, whilst encouraging
some future ideal. Read the following text, which is an extract from a speech given
by Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma.

cannot stand back and just look on, and therefore
Burma would one day, like Japan and Germany, be
despised. Democracy is the only ideology which is
consistent with freedom. It is also an ideology that
promotes and strengthens peace. It is therefore the
only ideology we should aim for.

That is what my father said. It is the reason why
I am participating in this struggle for freedom and
democracy in the footsteps and traditions of my
father. To achieve democracy the people should be
united. That is very clear. It is a very plain fact. If there
is no unity of purpose we shall be unable to achieve
anything at all. If the people are disunited, no ideology
or form of government can bring much beneﬁt to
the country. This must be ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the minds
of the people. If there is no discipline, no system can
succeed. Therefore one people should always be united
and disciplined.

From a speech by Aung San Suu Kyi.

Work through Activity 1.52 then read this extract from a commentary on the
speech. It deals in particular with the ﬁrst three paragraphs.

The speaker adopts a personal and open tone, attitude or mood in her
use of direct statements (I believe that all the people), drawing on the
literal and metaphoric idea that the group is on some kind ofjourney
towards an ideal (march  towards the goal of democracy). At the same
time, the speaker tries to establish a personal connection with the
audience by referring to her own situation and circumstances in order
to alleviate any negative impression listeners might have about her
(people are saying that since I have spent most of my time abroad and am

married to a foreigner). She uses adverbs (frankly and openly) to express
her efforts to be honest with them. The use of repeated structures and
their syntactical positioning at the beginning of her sentences attempts
to reinforce this impression (It is true  It is also true), as does the choice

and now.

 

of repeated key words (have never interfered and will never interfere), the
switch from past to future tense — an indication of her conviction then

indeed, this sense of personal conviction is then directed towards
certainty about future actions. The use of repeated key phrases and

structures create a sense of purpose and intention (We must We must),

6

59Cambridge International AS Level English Language

drawing on the sense of unity in the use of the first person plural (We).
The repeated phrases create a feeling of logical, step by step building
blocks which make the arguments seem clear and sound (Ifdemocracy
 Democracy is), the syntactical positioning of the key word again
drawing emphasis to its centrality. This logical sequencing of arguments
leads on to a seemingly natural conclusion, conveyed by the use of
Therefore.

ACTIVITY 1.53

How does the ﬁnal paragraph:

I use references to Aung San Suu Kyi’s personal background to endorse her
ideas?

I use clear and authoritative language to suggest clarity of thought and
belief?

I use clauses to foreground the dangers of not listening to what she says?

Some types of speech may need to adopt a different style in order to create a special
sense of mood and occasion. Read the text below, which is an extract from a speech
given by the Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, after the assassination of
Mahatma Gandhi, leader of Indian independence.

As you read, list any words or phrases that convey the tone or mood of the
speech.

Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our
lives and there is darkness everywhere. I do not know
what to tell you and how to say it. Our beloved leader,
Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no
more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that. Nevertheless,
we will not see him again as we have seen him for
these many years. We will not run to him for advise
and seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow,
not to me only, but to millions and millions in this
country, and it is a little difﬁcult to soften the blow by
any other advice that I or anyone else can give you.

The light has gone out, I said, and yet I was
wrong. For the light that shone in this country was
no ordinary light. The light that has illumined this
country for these many years Will illumine this
country for many more years, and a thousand years
later that light will still be seen in this country, and the
world will see it and it will give solace to innumerable
hearts. For that light represented the living truth  the
eternal truths, reminding us of the right path, drawing
us from error, taking this ancient country to freedom.

From a speech by Jawaharlal Nehru.

o 0 0 FURTHER RESEARCH