Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

 

The importance of paralinguistics

Paralinguistic features are critically important in any conversation, both for the
speaker putting across their points and for the hearer interpreting what is being
said. The link between the two is assisted by feedback — signals that the listener
gives to show they are following the conversation. Feedback can be expressed by
any of the features shown in the diagram below:

  
 
   
 
   
  
  

Verbal responses, for example sure, absolutely, really, I know

Back-channel noises, for example mm, oh

Non-verbal facial expressions and body language, for example
smiling and hand gestures to reinforce what is being said

<———————_—>
Pauses these are meaningful in any conversation,

sometimes indicating unease and tension as well as
simply when someone is thinking about what to say

Vocal expressions (for example giggling, sighing, tutting, oohing

and aahing) these are always linked to the intentions ofthe speaker

and within the context ofthe culture, these will be
mutually understood

<—'—_—————>

Summary: key points for discourse analysis

At A Level you are required to analyse and comment on an unseen piece of
discourse which will show many of the conventions you have explored and
discussed during your course.

There is a fundamental difference between the scripted speech of plays,
the dialogue in ﬁctional writing, formal speeches, sermons and other texts,
where speech is already written and planned, and the unscripted discourse of
conversations. The ﬁrst group have all the characteristics of written texts which you
have studied in your AS course. In your A Level course you will also be looking at
examples of unscripted spoken language in the form of transcripts.

Remember the following key points and skills when planning and writing your
discourse analysis.

Language features

An effective analysis must not only accurately pinpoint a language feature using the
correct terminology and giving an example, but it must comment on the meaning
and eﬁects of the use of that feature. Simply identifying features is insufﬁcient.

Remember to use the point/quotation/comment technique as the basis for your
analysis or commentary.

For more about using the point/
quotation/comment technique,
see pages 17—20.

Context

The context of the utterances — the time, the place and role of the speakers, their
relationship and purpose in talking — are fundamental to their choice of language
and how they communicate. It is important to establish these elements of context at
the outset as this will affect all aspects of the management of the conversation.

You should expect transcripts of conversations from a variety of cultures. It
is therefore important to make reference to the possible cultural/societal norms

For more about the importance
of context in discourse, see
pages 174—178.For more about register, see
page 193.

   

 

For more about topic shifts, see
page 155. -

 

For more about the conventions
of unscripted conversation, see
pages 154—168.

For more practice and self-
evaluation on this unit, see
page 286.

Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

and contexts which may affect the language and management of unscripted
conversation.

Register

The register of the discourse should be established; this is seen through the level of
formality. You should assess whether the participants use formal Standard English
or whether the relationship and purpose ensure that informal varieties of English
and slang are used. The register will be evident throughout the conversation ‘
through the choice of vocabulary and syntax used for the topic under discussion.

Topic shifts

Once context, register and language features have been considered, the
management of the topic needs to be analysed. Do the participants talk on one
subject only or are there topic shifts where other topics are introduced? If so,

how do these enter the conversation? Equally, does the conversation appear to
drift or return in a loop to subjects discussed earlier? You will need to look at the
strategies the participants adopt in the opening and closing sections of the text.
The relationships between the participants including their gender, age and relative

status will help to anchor your analysis back to the context and purpose (the aim of
the conversation).

Conventions

The body of the transcript will contain linguistic conventions of unscripted
conversation which individuals use. "Hie interaction of the participants and their
management of the conversation will be evident in the adjacency pairs and the
extent of equality will be seen in turn-taking and interruptions. Your analysis
should continue with comments relating to the maxims of conversation as well as
the politeness strategies which are (or are not) adopted. At all times relate this back
to your perceived awareness of the purpose and the context of the conversation.

173Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups 

The context of spoken language

In the ﬁrst section of this unit you will explore the ways in which our spoken
ACTIVITY 5.1

language is inﬂuenced and altered by the people and situations we encounter.

Try to clarify exactly what
is meant by a group. Then

discuss with others the TIP
different types of groups to Because every community has different groups to which individuals can belong,
which people belong you should always use specific examples from your own country or region.

A huge number of groups exist in any community; many of them may be very ill
defined and loosely constituted; they may be permanent or temporary. Ifyou
understand the functions ofthe examples you have selected, it will help you with
yourlanguage analysis.

 

When we use language it is invariably for a reason: to greet someone, to pay for
items bought in the supermarket, to shout support for a sports team, to worship.
The way in which our language is spoken is directly linked to the context — the
circumstances that form the setting for an event, statement, or idea, and in terms
of which it can be fully understood. For example, the context for language used in

a school staff meeting is the need to solve common goals and problems related to
the school so there will be vocabulary and syntax related to its functioning — such I
as the curriculum and exams — as well as purposeful discussion about the students’ ;
progress. Standard English is likely to be spoken and it is likely that minutes (a
written record of subjects discussed and decisions made) will be created. Of course
there may be pleasant comments (phatic communion) about topics such as the
weather and health, which helps the occasion along, but these are subsidiary to the
purpose of the activity.

ACTIVITY 5.2

Explain how language use may be inﬂuenced by the following contexts:

a Visit to the doctor

advertising a product for sale

a lesson '

using a social network site

a visit to an elderly relative

travelling to a country where you do not speak the language ﬂuently
talking to a person who is hard of hearing

talking to a person who has a limited command of your language.

Groups and the context in which they operate provide a complex web of formal and ‘
informal interaction within a society. There may be deﬁned rules for belonging, 
such as enrolment at a college; membership may depend on location such as aUnit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

neighbourhood; or upon skills achieved (e.g. the Under—14s Auckland Girls’ netball
squad); or upon preference such as a group of friends.

The language used by group members can also be another form of identiﬁcation
where individuals aim to make their speech more like those of the majority Within
the group. [
ll

Communication accommodation theory

Communication accommodation theory (CAT) is a theory of communication
developed by Howard Giles. It argues that when people interact they adjust their
speech, their vocal patterns and their gestures, to accommodate to others.

The theory explores the idea that as individuals we do not like to appear too
different from those with whom we spend time. When using language we try to
minimise the differences between us and other people by ‘accommodating’ or
changing our language to become more like theirs. A very obvious example in
the United Kingdom and the United States is regional accents where those who
do not speak as the majority do, may try to alter their accents. Since speech is
a way to express group membership, people adopt convergence or divergence
in their communication with those around them. If we wish to create distance
between ourselves and other people, we. may consciously diverge from the group
in the language we adopt, for example by speaking with a different accent or using
different forms of address (e.g. ﬁrst versus family name and title).

As a starting point for studying the language of social groups we can establish
the following key ideas: 1 i

 

I At any point in time we function in society as members of many social groups; 175
these develop and change throughout our lives.

I As part of our own identity we want to be similar to — or accommodate to — §

‘ other members of the groups to which we belong; the CAT theory suggests

that changing our language to be more like others in the group is one of the
strategies we adopt.

I In our daily lives we adapt and change our styles of language according to the
context. As we become more socially competent we accomplish these changes
unconsciously and with relative ease.

ACTIVITY 5.3

Karen is a doctorpractising in the city ofBath, in the south ofEngland. She

Based On Your knowledge grew up in Barnsley, an industrial town in the north of England where the
of social groups and accent is very diﬁ‘erent. (You can ﬁnd examples of these a’iﬁerent accents i
accommodation, what online.) ‘

is Your response to the Karen: When I was ten I moved with my parents and little sister from

following example? Barnsley to Oxford as my father had a new job. I didn’t realise I had any
sort of accent at all until I started school the following week and all my
classmates laughed at me. It took me two weeks to learn to talk like they
did and in about a month I had lost all traces of my Barnsley accent.

Festivals and ceremonies are an excellent way to see how language changes

according to context. Read the following information about the different language
contexts used at a recent wedding in Canada.

.____‘___q...._.._... “AA 44 4Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Before the ceremony
The ‘Save the Date’ card

Save the date for the wedding of
Ndyana Connage with Niall Daniel Sorour

23rd August

Details to follow later

 

a“ Wham-yaw.”er “Mm swwmm amﬁgmww «Wham, , V W w, TM “wwwwumwvywa‘mp-s

 

The Wedding Invitation

Mr and Mrs Donald Connage

request the pleasure of your company on the occasion of the
marriage of their daughter

I Ndyana with Niall Sorour
176

 

at l pm on Saturday 23rd August
at the The Lakes Hotel, Squamish, BC

Carriages at midnight

l
l
Followed by a reception at the Riverside Hotel 
r
F
RSVP byjune 24th 2074 l

I

i

«Him arm.“v1~t~m~w,,.,~~,»w .nmqum wig.  a "may tam-a: /,"‘"’17-«w',, » an.» “WM-rx-«vwvxqawWmL14“ﬁ‘"Wﬂk‘W/vaywwmvrawmww-‘rxﬂmv‘rc'ww‘rh“Hymw~‘» / ,_-

The wedding invitation is also likely to contain details of the wedding present list,
which these days may give information about on line purchases from a particular
store. Depending on the location of the wedding and the distances travelled by the
guests, details of hotel accommodation may also be included.

The wedding service is a legal ceremony and as such must be accompanied
by certain formal statements, for example Does anyone know of any just cause or
impediment why these two people should not be joined together in marriage? I now
pronounce you husband and wife. As well as written documentary proof that the
marriage has taken place and has been publicly witnessed the Marriage Certiﬁcate
is the legal proof.

Formal ‘set pieces’ of language are also present in the social side of the
reception: there are speeches and toasts to the married couple, and the cutting of
the cake and the ﬁrst dance are also accompanied by public announcements to the
guests which are often formulaic, for example Ladies and gentlemen, please join me

in raisingyour glasses to Ndyana and Niall, Mr and Mrs Sorour; the bride andgroom
are about to cut the cake.

View a=«