Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

people with a very speciﬁc interest to meet like—minded people. The fans share a
common language and this jargon gives linguistic cohesion to the group. On a
Harry Potter website for example, all fans of the I. K. Rowling books and ﬁlms
would be able to discuss the relative merits of Gryffyndor and Huﬁ‘lepuff as houses
at Hogwarts School. These are lexical items relevant to the books and the ﬁlms.
Non—members of these fan groups are excluded by their ignorance of speciﬁc terms
and they are often not allowed to post messages on the forums. Membership and
language are important discriminators.

Fan groups are bound together by the continuing spin—offs from the books and
ﬁlms; merchandise is available for sale and fan art and fan ﬁction further reinforce
solidarity and group interests. The boundaries between ﬁction and real life are
frequently crossed, such as in fan ﬁction and fan art where the original narrative is
developed by fans or by conventions where actors in role can meet their fans.

English—speaking websites have a global spread and other fan groups develop
sites for other regions.

The following quotes are taken from the Harry Potter SnitchSeeker fan website.

Established in 2002, SnitchSeeker is a Harry Potterfansite, forum, and news site with a large
member base and an active and welcoming community. Most ofour discussions and activities
focus on J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter books and movies, and our members are passionate about
them. Here on SS there are various places for discussing almost any Harry Potter topic that
appeals to our members. Perhaps you want to talk about your all—time favorite Harry Potter

character, or share what ﬂavor of Bertie Bott’s Every Flavour Beans you would most like to try.
You can do that right here on SS.

Yesterday at 3: 1 4pm
You can ﬁnd me here mostly in the School RPG, the ministry RPG as well as the WWW forums. That however doesn’t mean I .

don’t visit other forums. in the School RPG i play a Slytherin girl named Cassia and she’s going to be a sixth year soon! Oh and

as for the house, lam a Slytherin in pottermore, too! So it’s not only an lC thing. Slytherin is my favorite house, next to it comes
Gryfﬁndor. Of course I do like all the four houses.

Welcome to snitchseeker

Yesterday at 4:23pm

[my favourite characterﬂ Voldemort. Hehe kiiiiidding. =3 You know that’s a tough one. As much as I’d like to say George or Fred l
couldn’t because l’m not like them. xD I’d saaaay Remus Lupin.

Yesterday at 4:45pm

In answer to Whatisyourfavourite Harry Potterﬁ/m?l think mine would have to be POA and OOTP, because that’s where everything
starts falling into place and we really learn some things about our favorite characters.

 

-, Mango—u.mvwwmwiwuWWW .m...m,,.._m., yﬁa (“my  

ACTIVITY 5.14

These activities are designed to show you the language
of fan sites so that you can assess the extent to which the

fans become an exclusive group, deﬁned by the language
used amongst its members. 2

m m»..mw,..mwmv,. Wm» we”. .31?" 1-wme

wvmv»m'rw~w~a-rr~v-—«ewe-me—ww«memewu«~®m~w-wrm wvwvwvmm-m r’
www.5nitchseeker.com

be understandable to anyone? Identify any jargon
words and phrases which would not make sense and
would therefore exclude someone who was not a fan.

Research a fan website for a book, TV show or ﬁlm

of your choice. What jargon is used that would be
understandable to website members but not outsiders?

1 Look at the extract above from the SnitchSeeke‘rﬂfan
site. To what extent do you think the material would

189Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

3 Explain, with examples that you have researched, how 4 Read the extract from HPearth, an Indian—based

fan sites give status to their members and reinforce
the solidarity and mutual support of the fan group.

Chris Rankin, who played Percy
Weasley in the Harry Potter films.

 

Harry Potter website, and assess the role of such
international sites for fans throughout the world.

it had quite a humble beginning in early months of its formation where it was
known by a different name,’Potter’s india: Harry Potter comes to India’. Its foundation
was laid by Harsh Sadhvani with a website hosted on geocities and a range of Harry
Potter fanmade videos under the section ’Homemade HPC Meanwhile Suman Barua
was running a yahoo group called HPindia sucessfully with a lot of participants
grouped into houses conducting HP Web Activities. Both Suman and Harsh were
also staff at Harry Potter lndia (a well established website that time) under Chetan
Bansal (now an llTian). It was there that these two guys came in contact, and being
in the same city, connected. Both wanted to spread to an international dominion
and hence came up with ’HPearthcom’and launched it on Bist October 2OOS.The §
duo began adding the bricks to the foundation and now it has grown to the cadres

of being an international website, the only Harry Potter fan website with Indian roots

which has survived the downfall of many big HPfansites.

www.hpearth.com

Interviews
The relationship between a star and his or her fans is another medium whereby a
community of shared values develops and language is a part of this.

The following is an edited version of an interview with the actor Chris Rankin
who plays the character Percy Weasley in the Harry Potter ﬁlms. Interviews like
this are supplemented by posts, online forums and tweets, all of which use speciﬁc
references to the ﬁlms and books and are of course mutually understood by the

/

fans.

In addition to highlighting some of the mutually understood language of the
fan group, this extract will give you more practice with unscripted conversational
features. The commentary which follows highlights the ideas of the language of an
inclusive group, but you should also be able to analyse this from the point of View of
discourse.

Speakers: Chris Rankin (Chris), interviewer (Int).

CHRIS I play Percy Weasley  in six of eight ﬁlms (.) and I am a O um a
regular [Mug/.25]

INT so  in the events (.) er do you wanna  to talk about these events 
What makes you want to come back every year

CHRIS it’s a lot of fun  um I think the first one y (.) I accidentally went to
[laughs] that sounds weird but it is  7 is it 7 years ago (2) yes 7 years
ago (2) nearly 7 years ago  I got asked by Salem town council  to
be the guest of honour at their Halloween parade  which in Salem
is quite a big deal/

INT yeah/CHRIS

INT

CHRIS

INT

CHRIS

>.
E
'—
Z
I.”
E
E
O
U

 

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

That was awesome  I said yes I would love to go (.) so I didn’t
really know what to expect // . .. Then I turned up and there were
all these people in costume (.) um and  er (.) I got arrested by a
bunch of Death Eaters  and we stage crashed a Harry Potter gig
(.) and  it was awesome and I bumped into a load of people I had
spoken to on line   I’d um done podcasts for Leaky Cauldron
and I’d spoken to HPNA about stuﬁC (.) and actually met them

face to face  and really just ended up having a really cool time
and //

//so it was  like larger than life  was it  like what you were
expecting

it wasn’t what I was expecting (2) initially I was really scared of it 
well because I was like  I’m an actor in these ﬁlms and I’m staying

in a hotel full of Harry Potter fanatics and um I’m not entirely sure if
I’m safe// [Mug/95]

// [Mug/.75]

Then I started speaking to people (.) they were really great  they
were really nice and friendly and enthusiastic  we shared a lot of
common interest cos  obviously I’m a big Harry Potter fan as well
(.) so (1) um kind of rocked up to a couple of events (.) sat in on a
couple of screens and things and  just had an awesome time. um 
and then ‘cos of ﬁlming commitments and stuff  I couldn’t do any
for a while for a while  and then I came to Ascatraz which was in
San Francisco about three years ago  and I’m here now and  it’s
cos I love them// and they’re a lot of fun

www.youtube.com

This interview took place at a Harry Potter convention where Chris
was being interviewed for both the fans and a wider audience. The
purpose was to ‘get behind’ the character and get to know the actor.
Chris is a British actor who was at a fan convention in the United
States.

Both Chris and the interviewer are young, and use colloquialisms
(racked up, awesome) which are familiar to the audience who, as a social
group, are likely to be of a broadly similar age and so would feel some
connection with the young actor who carries through his enthusiasm for
the world of Harry Potter. In this context, Chris has the higher status but

there is an equality between the two, with the interviewer overlapping,
with feedback and some supportive comments:

... ended up having a really cool time and//
//So it was (.) like larger than life

The language is a structured conversation with question and answers
in adjacency pairs. The expectation of the listener and viewers is that
Chris will dominate the conversation and will be informative. The lexical

191Cambridge lnternationalA Level English Language

 

The terms Standard and
non-standard English are
very broad, so it is essential
that you have a clear
understanding of their
meaning and particularly of
the connotations attached
to the term non—standard.
This will help you in writing
essays as you may be asked
to appraise issues relating
to these types of English and
their acceptability.

 

field of Harry Potter and fandom is another shared understanding and
there is no need to explain specific language such as Death Eaters, Leaky
Cauldron and HPNA.

Chris makes a wary but friendly reference to the possible fanatic
behaviour of the fans when he wonders about his safely as the character
in a hotel full offans but this is comprehenswely mitigated when he

1 Explain the role that language plays in a relationship between a star and
their fans.

Non-standard features of English

Non-standard speech is a general term for language which differs from the usual,
accepted and recognisable speech of native speakers. In this section you will
explore slang and non—standard forms of English in the context of language change
and current usage.

Standard and non-standard English

The term non—standard has a value judgement attached to it. A prescriptivist
viewpoint would consider non—standard language ‘wrong’ since this approach
evaluates and judges language according to recognised rules of grammar.
Prescriptivists talking about language use in Britain often refer to a very general
‘Golden Era’ where the population was able to read, write and talk ‘correctly’.
The suggested dates are always rather vague but have been put by some linguists,
James Millroy for example, at between 1944—1965, after the introduction of the
1944 Education Act which legislated for universal secondary education in
Britain.

This ‘Golden Era’ of supposedly correct English speaking is sometimes also
commented on in other English—speaking areas of the world, such as Singapore
where the government promotes the values of English over the Singlish local
dialect.

A descriptivist Viewpoint observes and describes the linguistic world as it is,
without preconceived ideas about how it ought to be. In this View, there is no single
‘right’ standard by which others are judged. Linguist lean Aitcheson, for example,
believes that language is continually developing and is not deteriorating because of
generation change.Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

«aw. FURTHER RESEARCH

  

The idea that the rules of English grammar are laid down and must be followed it
at all times has given way in recent years to the concept of appropriateness and 1‘
differing registers of language use. (As you know, register is a variety of language
appropriate for use in a particular setting.) There are many different contexts for
language use, but we can identify the following main categories:

I formal: where recognised, Standard English is followed in both speech and
writing
I colloquial (or casual): the everyday language of discourse; the register used by
friends and the more informal media 193

I slang and non-standard: situations which demand that a more basic and very
informal variety of language is used; slang is used much more widely in spoken
‘ than in written language

I frozen language: language which is unchanging and generally full of archaisms 1
(words and phrases used in earlier times but no longer in use).

Using the four broad divisions given above, consider what type of language
register would be most appropriate for the following situations. Give reasons
for your opinion.

the American Declaration of Independence

two friends meeting in a café

an English Language text book

New Zealanders watching their national rugby team, the All Blacks, play
Australia

a recipe

a music video

a technical training manual
a TV game show

a marriage ceremony
teenagers on a social networking site ‘ 
a Bollywood movie

a job interviewCambridge International A Level English Language

 

Language change

The context of any discourse determines the style of language used and ther

efore - »
is evident that language must change with society. English is a Vibrant and It ‘

dyna . _
language which has changed, spread and adapted to cultural variations. HOWeveTlcv

an apparent deterioration in speech, writing and general literacy, particularly in th ._
digital age, is a cause for concern amongst some groups, including educa’tionahstS e
Will English break down until it is incomprehensible? ' :

Others are more optimistic and see a language which changes according to the '
needs of its speakers. This is a more democratic process as language belongs to
those who use it and languages die if they fail to serve the needs of those who Speak r
them.

All languages change constantly with a steady stream of new words appearing
as others drop out. Pronunciation changes too, so that it is only when we hear a
speaker from the past, even the recent past, they strike us as ‘old-fashioned’. The 1
Oxford English Dictionary’s 2013 Word of the Year was selﬁe which, with the advent '
of social networking, is now used worldwide. We can look forward to many more
new words being added to the dictionary in the future.

In addition to the introduction of new words, the meaning of existing words can
change and four major trends have been identiﬁed:

I pejoration, in which a term acquires a negative association. The word silly is a
example of pejoration. In early Middle English (around 1200), sely (as the word
was then spelled) meant ‘happy, blissful, blessed, fortunate’ as it did in Old
English.

194 I amelioration, in which a term acquires a positive association. For example, the
word nice when it ﬁrst appeared in Middle English (about 1200) meant ‘foolish,

silly, simple, ignorant, senseless, absurd’.

I widening, in which a term acquires a broader meaning The modern English
word dog derives from the earlier dogge, which was originally a particularly
powerful breed of dog.

I narrowing, in which a term acquires a narrower meaning. The old English mete
(meat) originally meant any sort of food, but has now narrowed to refer to food
of an animal origin.

Reasons for language change

I Technology: new words are coined for new processes and changes. Equally
words disappear as the things that they are describing fall out of use.

I Geography: landscapes, flora and fauna require naming and these words
become part of regional dialect. For example English immigrants to Australia
coined outback and bush as words describing particularfeatures ofthe
landscape in that country.

I Social conditions: a whole range of economic, social (including gender), ethnic
and age changes require words to support new conditions

I Increasing specialisation: requires a body of language to support it — for
example in law, medicine and the media

I International travel and contacts: mean that vocabulary becomes
international; food is a good example here as we are becoming increasingly
globalised in our tastes

I Changing communities: influence changes in language.Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

. u FURTHER RESEARCH

ACTIVITY 5.17

1 Select one area of technology and list as many new words and phrases that
you can think of that are related to it. Try to establish how these words

have developed, for example some may have derived from Latin words L
such as video. ‘

 

2 The following words were once in common use but have now almost
disappeared. Explain the meaning of each:

betwixt

naught whither

wrought ye

forsooth verily

 

Slang l‘

Slang is unusual, direct, sometimes offensive language which is not regarded
as standard. It may not be considered polite and may feature words or phrases 
concerned with sexuality and bodily functions. Slang words are always changing

and can become dated very quickly. Slang also acts as an identity marker for groups

— as we know, language is used to include and exclude people from different social
groups.

ACTIVITY 5.18

Read the article on slang.

I What are the functions of
slang?

I Why does slang keep
changing?

I Give some examples of
speciﬁc words or phrases
to show how slang
originates and becomes

dated.

a o 3 FURTHER REVSNEARCHV

 

The Joy of Slang

Slang such as ain’t, innit and coz has
been banned from a school in south
London. The following paragraph
is an extract from author Charles

Nevin and emphasises how speedily 

fashionable slang phrases die out
even if they are later reinvented.
Please do not misunderstand me. I
love modern slang. It’s as colourful,
clever, and disguised from outsiders
as slang ever was and is supposed

mmmmmmwwmvw‘wv'"‘~~ wmv- M ww'v r  w . x

to be. Take ‘bare’, for example, one
of a number of slang terms recently
banned by a London school. It means
‘a lot of ’, as in ‘there’s bare people
here’, and is the classic concealing
reversal of the accepted meaning
that you also ﬁnd in ‘Wicked’, ‘bad’
and ‘cool’. Victorian criminals did
essentially the same with back slang,
reversing words so that boy became
‘yob’ and so on.

195

www.bbc.co.uk

Regarding Australian slang, a TripAdvisor traveller article says:
Be prepared and know the slang so you won’t look like a drongo.

Colloquial Australian English was once very distinctive, however,

in recent times it has adopted many Americanisms and British slang.
That said, there are still many phrases and words that are uniquely
Aussie. Travellers should note that Australians use many words in
day-to-day speech which may be considered profanities in other parts

ofthe world.CAMBRIDGE ENDORSED BY '
UNIVERSITY PRESS » 

InternationalCambridge lnternationalA Level English Language

 

Indian slang has caught the attention of the Indian Times:

SLANGING CATCH: Mind Your Language

I blurted out an ‘s’ word as an  in front of children. Having said that,
expression of instantaneous disgust  it is difﬁcult to put paid to the use
after the lights went out one day.  of four—letter words, because slang,
To my horror, my little girl picked  curses and Obscenities haVe immense

it up. ’lhat made me realise how  therapeutic value for venting our
much care we should take with our  pent-up rage and disillusionment,
language, particularly when speaking 

rn—W, Mr. i. waves,“ V r q 7, .WV ,. _ M. . M,“ ,. Vawnwwmw-mmavwwmwﬂw,wxw~ﬂ~m- sung-«ﬂaws, arms;m.,..vm vsrv‘m _

W4.”

timesofindia.indiatimes.com

Teenage language is widely perceived to be full of slang, which changes very rapidly.
TIP Teenagers are early adopters of new forms which can become instantly global. :5

Fmd examples 0f Standard However, many slang phrases are local and act as a badge of identity for the group
and non—standard English who uses them.

from your own region that

you can use as examples. This
topic benefits from specific ACTW'TY 5’19
case studies rather than

broad generalisation S. 1 Should we be concerned about teenagers’ use of slang? Give reasons for
your answer.

 

2 Explain why slang words and phrases are continually changing. Give

some examples of your current local slang and try to ﬁnd the origins of
some of the words and phrases used.

 

 

“That’s like, so random!”
www.CartoonStock.com

@TIP
The boundaries between
colloquialisms, slang and ‘bad
language’ can be blurred.
Make sure that you know the
difference between these,

but be careful not to offend

or shock people when you
carry out research on people’s
views on what constitutes bad
language.

a o 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

Slang and bad language

What is forbidden can sometimes be tempting and this is the same with language.
What is considered ‘bad’, insulting or forbidden language is purely a guideline
adopted by those within a particular group or community.

Here are some points to remember when considering ‘bad’ language:

I Most cultures have some form of insult; the Romans are said to have had 800!

I Insults and ‘bad’ language are most often focused on: bodily parts and

functions; that which is forbidden; and also the sacred, which refers to the
religion of the group.

I Shakespeare used some very interesting-sounding insults. In Romeo and Juliet
Lord Capulet, in a furious temper that his daughter Juliet is disobeying him,
calls her you green sickness carrion  you baggage  you carrion.

I Slang originating in one area can spread rapidly: the following slang phrases
originated in New York City but have spread throughout the United States and
beyond: schlep (a tedious trip), bagel and a schmear (bagel and cream cheese),
uptown (travelling north in New York City), wavy (good), bananas (crazy).
Here are some more examples of slang words that have come into English from
around the world: chai, hooch, arvo. Are these words known in your region?

As with slang, insults change with social values. Fifty years ago, Britain was much
more sensitive to insults using religious terminology, but used many racial terms
which are not tolerated now. Your own society may have experienced similar
changes. As we have established, language is closely related to social values.

You are unlikely to be asked to write exclusively about bad language and slang
but you need to be able to discuss those areas of language which, for whatever
reason, are not considered acceptable. It is worth remembering that most of these

words and phrases will slip quietly out of usage, to be studied with interest by
future English language students!

Jargon

Iargon is another form of non-standard English because it is often not part of
mainstream usage. It relates most frequently to technical words and phrases

used by specialist groups, or by professionals such as doctors and lawyers. In
some extreme cases it may become almost unintelligible, and examples of wordy
government documents often make the headlines. However, jargon can be similar

to slang, in that it is restricted to a certain group where its use ensures mutual and
precise understanding between group members.

ACTIVITY 5.20

1 Select a group, for example doctors, teachers, lawyers or online gamers,

and research some terms which they might use when communicating with
members of their own group.

2 Select a group to which you belong — either formally or informally —
and think of jargon which you share with other members of that group.

Evaluate the role of jargon in communication amongst your group
members.

3 What might be the impact of hearing jargon on those outside the group?

197Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Speech sounds and accents

The huge number of sounds that you produce during the course of a day are aimOSt
all used in the production of speech. You can cough, giggle, snort and laugh but yOu
are constantly re—forming your speech organs to communicate with others through
language.

You will know the basic information about the alphabet and the sounds
associated with each letter, and this is relevant here as it adds information about the
sounds of the accents used in our speech.

English is spoken in very many different ways and these variations in speech
produce a variety of accents. In many parts of the English-speaking world, the
accent spoken is closely associated with social class and prestige. Read the following
results from a newspaper survey of the importance of accent to people in Britain;

 
 
   
 

V accent't'h'e chala
pronunciation ass
a geographical ar

 

Accents are a significant
feature ofspoken English
in any English-speaking

part 0fthe world- Althoygh I one in ﬁve people change their accent to sound more posh, to get a job or to chat

some case study material someone up

here relates to Britain, you

Should m a ke sure you have V I eight per cent of Britons have made themselves sound more posh

additional examples from I four per cent have tried to make themselves sound less posh

your Own country or reg'on' l reasons for changing accent include job interviews or to be understood. ‘3 .

www.dailymail.co.uk

Speech sound production

Speech is the primary medium of language. Speech sounds are produced as we

TIP breathe out. The column of air that we exhale is modiﬁed as it passes from the

The information given here lungs, out past the glottis in the throat, through the mouth or nose; it is given voice
about sound production is (noise) by the vocal chords in the glottis; and individual sounds are shaped by the

important background for mouth and the tongue.
your understanding ofthe '

language issues relating to
accents.

 

 

  
   

, Hard palate
. W‘Soﬁ palate (velum)

 

Up a , , Pharyngeal cavity
Teeth I  ‘ Larynx
Jaw\—l ‘ -; Oesophagus

Oral cavity Trachea

Lung

Diaphragm

The parts of the human anatomy
used for speech production.Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

TIP

The phonetic alphabet is
invaluable in helping you

to clarify the exact sounds
of pronunciation, but you
do not need to learn it. It is
not examined specifically at
A Level but it is important
to know that this alphabet
provides the definitive
description ofspeech sounds
and so is an important
reference tool in spoken
language.

 

 

I Vowels are sounds made with no restriction of air through the mouth; the
different sounds are formed by the shape made by the mouth.

I Consonants are sounds made with some restriction to the airﬂow, for example
by the tongue, teeth or lips.

There are 21 consonant letters in the written alphabet (B, C, D, F, G, H, I, K, L, M,
N, P, Q, R, S, T, V, W, X, Y, Z), and there are 24 consonant sounds in most English

accents  Because ofthe erratic history ofEnglish spelling, there is no neat one-t0-
one correlation between letters and sounds.

From The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language by David Crystal.

Our alphabet has no single letter for spelling some consonant sounds, for example
ch as in chain or th as in thin and ng as in sing.

The term alphabet comes from alpha and beta, the ﬁrst two letters of the Greek
alphabet.

The international Phonetic Alphabet

The purpose of the International Phonetic Alphabet is to provide a means of
accurately transcribing the sounds of speech independent of any language. The
IPA is used in some foreign language textbooks and phrase books to transcribe the
sounds of languages which are written with non—Latin alphabets. It is also used by
non-native speakers of English when learning to speak English. You will see that
the symbols are not all recognisable letters, as in the English alphabet, and the
symbols created can replicate the sounds which are not accurately represented by
single letters.

ACTIVITY 5.21

I Investigate the ways in which we produce the different consonant sounds
of our voice.

I Select ten words and, with the help of the table above, write them out using
the correct phonetic symbols. You could start by writing your name.

I Are there different accents in your class? Ask your fellow students to
say the same word and use the IPA to show how it is pronounced Try to
represent the sounds as precisely as possible.Cambridge International A Level English Language

The sounds of speech — our accent

 

Tum to page 166 in Unit 4 to The means of voice production is universal in human beings. It is the sound) stres
find out more about the prestige and intonation which produce the wide variety of accents in the English languages
and status of different accents Accent refers only to the way a word is pronounced and the huge variety in

m EngllSh- ways of speaking which exist in English. Apart from Received Pronunciation

(RP), accents may associate a person with a certain region. Received
Pronunciation is a concept which originated in Britain and developed solely
through reference to conditions existing in Britain although the accent can be
spoken by anyone throughout the English-speaking world. RP itself is an accent
with a high social status rather than being linked to a speciﬁc geographical
location. If an accent is very different from RP it is said to be ‘broad’ and of a
correspondingly lower status.

Accents change far more quickly over time than the spellings of written
language, so many English words are not spelled in the way that they are
pronounced. Nearly all students of English experience difﬁculties in spelling
correctly as there are many irregularities and inconsistencies, for example:

 

I words with the same pronunciation are spelled differently, for example write,
right, rite

I words with the same spelling are pronounced differently, for example invalid,
invalid; refuse, refuse

l many words have silent letters, for example climb, knight, ballet

I words may diverge with the English/American system of spelling, for example
I plough/plow, neighbour/neighbor, programme/program.

Social accents

It is impossiblefor an Englishman to open his mouth without making some other
Englishman hate or despise him.

English playwright George Bernard Shaw in the preface to his play Pygmalion.

Traditionally, in the UK, broader regional accents have been associated with
lower socio— economic groups who have fewer formal qualiﬁcations. In previous
generations, many people did not travel extensively and were therefore heavily
inﬂuenced by their local culture and speech. Today globalisation has changed
this situation as, throughout the world, higher socio— economic groups have
professional jobs as a result of higher qualiﬁcations and are more mobile both
geographically and socially. This generalisation is true for all areas of the world
including English—speaking ones.

There is some debate about how far this situation has changed in recent
generations but with a far greater ethnic mix and much wider travel for work and
leisure, a greater mix of accents can now be heard in urban areas. In the English—
speaking world there may still be perceived advantages in speaking RP and some
people will consciously modify their accents to speak in this way for professional
or social reasons. However, some have moved away from RP for a non—standard
accent such as Estuary English, which has become widely established in the UK
from its origins around the London area. A former British Prime Minister, Tony
Blair, modiﬁed his accent in this way, possibly to make himself sound ‘less posh’
and to speak more like many of the electorate.

Research studies have shown that women are more likely to use standard
pronunciation rather than their local accent. This is thought to be because in the
past women’s status was lower than men’s and so speaking in Standard English

6

\ACTIVITY 5.22

1

To what extent are you inﬂuenced in a positive or
negative way by different accents? Can you explain why?

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

helped them. With recent greater gender equality, this reason may not now be so
valid. Educationalists in England have placed higher priority on speaking (and
listening) in national English exams in an effort to make students aware of the
situations when Standard English is appropriate.

The United States is said to have no prestige dialect though, in practice, the
General American accent is more widely spoken in public forums than pronounced
regional accents.

A recent phenomenon has been the association of certain accents with
particular personal qualities. Business communication over the telephone from
global call centres, for example, has given rise to stereotypes of the speakers with
particular accents. For example the completely unfounded assumption that accents
from rural areas indicate that the speaker is of low intelligence.

It is a particular feature of British English that status and accent are closely
linked. The following article comments on the different perceptions of accents
within Britain, based on recent research in the UK. Yorkshire is a large county in
northern England, while Brummie is a slang term for a person from Birmingham,
the UK’s second largest city, in the midlands.

Yorkshire named top twang as Brummie
brogue comes bottom

Silence could well be golden for ambitious Brummies after research found people
with the distinctive nasal Birmingham accent were seen as stupid while those with
a Yorkshire twang were considered clever.

The study into dialect and perceived intelligence found that people who said
nothing at all were regarded as more intelligent than those with a Brummie accent.
This is despite a general trend in which regional dialects have become more
respectable. The Yorkshire accent is rated as the most intelligent—sounding, beating
Received Pronunciation, the accent of royalty and public school alumni, for the ﬁrst
time. [M] Times have changed since the days when received pronunciation, also

known as the Queen’s English, was seen as the language of the elite.

"Thirty years ago 10% ofthe population went to university/said DrWorkman
who led the study. “If someone had RP you’d probably think they had gone to
university. Today, 44% of young people go to university. I think there’s been a shift
in what we expect from somebody who is educatedThere’s been this change from
elite education to mass education.“

Workman added that while RP was once ubiquitous on the BBC, nowadays
many broadcasters have regional accents. RP was now widely regarded as“dull and
boring”, he added.

 

www.theguardian.com

differences in status amongst these accents? If so, what
do you think has been the reason for these differences?

Discuss why different accents may have stereotypes 4 Read the following article and explain the reasons why

attached to them.

A variety of English accents are now heard throughout
English-speaking areas. Do you feel that there are

Indian call centre workers are changing their accent.
Do you agree with what they are being asked to do?
Give reasons for your answer.

r «wry-Ir EWWWWF M mat-x 4m~ww~xm WWWMWWVWWW mwwwg. 7..., , mm ,.

 

201Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Accent neutralisation and a crisis of identity in India’s call centres

The demand for a neutral global accent

in the call centre industry is seeing lndian

workers stripped oftheir mother tongue.
initially, workers in the lndian call

centre industry were trained in speciﬁcally

American and British accents, but the

preference is increasingly toward a “neutral”

global accent, as it allows workers to be

shifted around to serve various markets

without additional training.

The demand for globalised speech has
led to the creation of specialised institutes
for accent neutralisation. "Those with
extremely good skills don’t want to [work
in call centres],”says Kiran Desai, a veteran
accent trainer. “What you get is a lot of
people who don’t speak very well and aren’t
from the best schools’lshe adds, in a crisp
Britishlndian accent.

Schools do not concentrate on phonetics ‘
enough “and so they pick up sounds from “
their mother tongue. We teach them to get
rid of motheretongue inﬂuence Ll". The complete programme, Desai says, takes three to four weeks to take hold in places such as

I Bombay and Pune, but can last up to two to three months in the south.

.V as

 

For Desai, these are purely technical issues; she is adamant that these practices do not lead to a “loss of culture.”[...] Yet Desai
says, uncomprehendingly, that there is sometimes resistance to training:”They say, ’l’m an Indian and l speak fairly well. Why do I
need to change7’l don’t know why [they objectl.”

 

www.theguardian.com

Towards the middle of the 19th century, many members of the newly emergent
middle class felt the need to shore up their status by taking elocution lessons,
learning to speak in RP, to establish their position of respectability. Voice coaches
still exist but are unlikely to instil the ‘cut glass’ tones of years ago.

The accents of English are changing, through the voices of the millions
worldwide who speak the language with varying degrees of ﬂuency. It is therefore
likely that the status of these accents will vary and will affect the social fabric of the
English—speaking community.

  

6 0 % FURTHER RESEARCHA female firefighter.

 

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

Theories and studies of social variation in
language

This section further demonstrates the Close relationship between ideas and
language. Recent social changes have changed our attitudes towards different
social groups. This has brought about a general tendency towards equality for all,
irrespective of gender, ethnicity, age, sexual orientation and disability. This helps to
ensure social progress and eliminate discriminatory treatment of people according

to preconceived stereotypes. The use of language to avoid discrimination is often
known as political correctness.

O 00' FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Political correctness and language links: the Sapir—Wharf
hypothesis

An important link with language and political correctness is the idea that language
can, in some way, affect the way we View the world and the people in it. Edward

Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf developed their own hypothesis about this. They
combined two related ideas:

I 4 Language determines the way we think. The words we use, directly frame our
thoughts. This is known as linguistic determinism.

I A weaker form of language determinism is that language is only a contributory
inﬂuence on what we think. This is known as linguistic relativism.

One way of understanding this is to ask yourself whether you can only express
your thoughts with the vocabulary you know; to what extent are you limited by
it? For example, if you are prevented from using a word to describe someone in a
particular way, then, according to the stronger theory, you will also change your
thoughts about them. If the connection between language and thought is weak,
then you will still ﬁnd words to think about the person — you will not be directly
limited.

If people believe members of other social groups to be inferior then they may
use inappropriate or abusive language to express these thoughts.

Here are some recent examples of language changes which have reinforced greater
social equality for various groups.

I Gender Traditional words for employment imply that only men can do certain
jobs, for example policeman, ﬁreman. These words have been neutralised to
make them applicable to all — police oﬁcer, ﬁreﬁghter.

I Comedy Certain types of comedy are now not acceptable such as personal

or derogatory comments at the expense of people’s physical appearance, for
example size and shape.

203Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

I Ethnicity Politically correct language combats many unpleasant racist slurs a

nd
insults. In the UK it is illegal to use racist language, gestures and acts.

 

See opposite for more about the . I . . .
issues mated to language and I Workplace changes The increasmg number of women In senior roles in

gender. workplaces throughout the world break down the assumption that the boss will
always be a he and that the secretary or personal assistant will be a she.

 

 

I Age In Britain, it is illegal to discriminate in terms of age; this is usually
taken to mean older people. There is anecdotal evidence that older women in
particular are subject to discrimination in a broader context. Changing attitudeS
about ageing have made people aware of words that reinforce stereotypes
(decrepit, senile) and the need to avoid mentioning age unless it is actually
relevant. Terms like elderly, aged, old and geriatric are increasingly replaced by
older person, senior citizens or seniors.

I Disability Laws against disability discrimination aim to remove the belief
that people are deﬁned by their disability. The term handicapped has generain
been replaced by the term disabled. A United States Government Paper states
that the term disabled is less desirable than people with disabilities because
the former implies that a person’s disability is the whole person rather than
just one of many personal characteristics. In Australia, the government-led
National Disability Strategy has as one of its core principles the inclusion and
participation in everyday life for people living with a disability.

I Religious beliefs are respected in language usage. In a multi—faith society for
example the term Christian name does not apply to all religions and so would be

I replaced byﬁrst name or personal name.
I

Political correctness has worthy intentions but some PC language has been
subjected to ridicule for its excess and exceptionally sensitive phrasing. The term
itself now has negative connotations. Many extreme examples appear to attempt
to allow for all group sensitivities. For example, it has been suggested that the city
Manchester should change its name to ‘Personchester’, while a person without hair
should be referred to as ‘follicly challenged’.

There are concerns that policing and controlling language brings the denial
of some freedoms of speech and the accusation that certain powerful groups are
adopting dictatorial methods. However, if people are brought up to treat others
respectfully, then hopefully this will bring about a more tolerant society.

ACTIVITY 5.23

1 Assess the extent of political correctness in the country where you live.
Which groups beneﬁt?

2 Discuss the criticism that overuse of politically correct language threatens
freedom of speech.

 

3 Give a politically correct alternative for each of the following and explain
why the original word may be considered unacceptable:

I lady doctor

air hostess
one—man show
a short fat man

man—made.Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

4 The struggle to be ‘politically correct’ has made people impatient and
oversensitive to what they and others say. It has created a society that walks
on eggshells and that has problems talking to each other for fear of causing
aﬁence.

How far do you agree or disagree with this statement?

Language and gender

Gender and language is a complex subject which covers a range of issues
concerning the language referring to males and females as well as perceived
differences in the language used by each gender.

As in other areas of language study, gender issues are part of the cultural fabric.
In 1963 a United States Federal Law enshrined the rule of equal pay for equal work.
Other societies have followed suit. Before that, women were automatically paid
less and for long periods in history, girls grew up with many more restrictions on
their educational and career prospects than boys. In many societies today, equal
opportunities are enshrined in law.

"lhere are very speciﬁc and traditional contrasts of language used to describe
male and female and the lack of parity between them. Examples include master and
mistress, hen and rooster, actor and actress. Associated with this use of language
has been the grammatical maxim that males dominate in writing thus always the
reference to he before she; the male gender name being used as the norm (as in
mankind); and the pronoun he being applied to both genders.

ACTIVITY 5.24

Interview a woman from an older generation, perhaps a relative or friend
or a member of your local community. Ask them about their memories of
language speciﬁc to females and to what extent they feel this has changed.

205

Differences in the language used by males and females

Traditionally there has been an assumption that males and females hold different
types of conversation. There has been a stereotype that women are passive listeners
whose lightweight discourse is described as mere gossip, while men have been
thought to deal with more weighty and serious matters in debate and discussion.

There is also a contrast of input from males and females. Men are seen to
interrupt and to ‘hold the conversational’ ﬂoor more than women and this
perception has led to some interesting experiments in measuring the extent of
equality in conversation between the genders.

The assumptions of this theory are largely taken from a mid 19705
study of a small sample of conversations, recorded by Don Zimmerman
and Candace West at the Santa Barbara campus ofthe University of
California. The subjects ofthe recording were white, middle—class and
under 35. Zimmerman and West produce 31 segments of conversation
in evidence. They report that in 11 conversations between men and
women, men used 46 interruptions, but women only 2.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Changes over time as well as cultural changes would suggest a different outCOme . p
the early part of the let century. 111

The perceived dominance of males in mixed communities has been of great ’
concern in many educational institutions. There is a the continuing debate abOut
the beneﬁts of single—sex education and, even where the genders are mixed, high
schools have experimented in separating some curriculum subjects, particularly
the sciences, by gender. Increasingly, in societies where the genders and ethnic

groups are approaching equality, the stereotype of male dominance can be seen as 

outdated.

Differences in language and gender in the globalised world of computer-
mediated communication (CMC) have produced research to claim that women
use an online language style typiﬁed by friendliness and a lack of hostility; this
contrasts with the men who use an online language style typiﬁed by hostility
and sarcasm. Other studies however, claim that women use the hostile language

typically associated with the male online language style and that Women are more
aggressive users of language than men in CMC.

no 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

  

Male and female conversation

Consider some of the vocabulary used to describe the ways in which people speak:
debate, chat, gossip, discuss, converse, communicate. Sometimes different vocabulary
has been stereotypically applied to the conversational styles of men and women.
You may be familiar with anecdotal stereotypes about the quality and quantity of
female language. In this section you will focus on the contrasts in language and
information which studies have revealed.

One of the more extreme and unpleasant historical images of gossiping
women is that of the tricoteuses — the French market women who sat knitting
and gossiping around the guillotine as members of the French aristocracy
were being executed during the French Revolution. Social Psychologists suggest
that gossip is an evolutionary strategy to forge friendships and also to keep
abreast of observed activities which may have provided an advantage in an
uncertain world. As such gossip would be of equal advantage to both men and
women.

Researchers have found that men gossip just as much as women and men were
found to be no more likely than women to discuss ‘weighty’ and important matters
such as the state of the economy and the meaning of life, except when women are
present. Gossip in single—sex conversations takes up roughly the same amount of

time with one very interesting difference — that men talk about themselves a lot
more than women do!

m,Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

Research studies have shown the following characteristics of male and female

language:

Men are less likely to give supportive feedback such as really, yeah and mm, and
are less likely to cooperate in turn-taking.

Women’s conversation is the reverse: in summary, they tend to be
conversationally more cooperative, giving feedback, using tag questions, and
using modal verbs more frequently to suggest possibilities or alternatives for
discussion, whereas men tend to use assertions and commands.

Women tend to do the ‘hard work’ in keeping a conversation going by asking
questions and continuing conversations. Robin Lakoff (1975) identiﬁed the
‘politeness principle’ in women’s conversation: women use politeness strategies
more frequently, such as please and thanks.

There is evidence that the vocabulary choices of women tend to be more
evaluative and descriptive (e.g. lovely, wonderful, delightful) as well as showing
increased use of adverbs of degree to embellish what is being said (e.g. very,
really).

Traditionally men’s language has been considered coarser than women’s.
Women consistently use more standard forms of language while men are more
likely to use grammatically incorrect forms.

Deborah Tannen’s research

Deborah Tannen is a distinguished American academic of in the field of
language. She has written extensively on the gender differences in the
conversational style of men and women. Her findings are closely linked
to the status and roles ofthe participants in the Western societies where
she has carried out her research. Tannen’s work was a development of
earlier studies by John Gumperz who examined differences of speech
styles in different cultures. Tannen considered gender differences in a
similar light.

Tannen contrasts the discourse style of men and women in
Western societies using the following styles. She attributes the first
characteristic in each pair as male and the second as female:
status vs support
independence vs intimacy
advice vs understanding
information vs feelings
orders vs proposals

conflict vs compromise.

ACTIVITY 5.25

1 Look at Deborah Tannen’s list of contrasting discourse styles and think of
speciﬁc examples to match each descriptor.

2 You may live in a very different society to that researched by Tannen.
Using the descriptors given above, discuss, with evidence, how far these
labels apply in the region Where you live. Investigate whether any research

207Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

has been done to answer this. You might want to set up a controlled
experiment of your own.

3 Take extracts from soCial media sites to test to what extent the claims
of contrasting language styles of the assumed gender of the participants
conforms to Tannen’s research ﬁndings listed above.

4 Do you recognise these gender distinctions in conversation from your own
experience? Discuss with other members of the class. If you perceive big

‘0' FURTHER RESEARCH . .
differences, can you explain why?

5 Listen to unscripted and scripted conversations and assess to what extent
you observe the patterns from Tannen’s research results.

6 Listen and watch a range of radio and TV shows including the relatively
unscripted talk shows. In what ways do these conversations follow a
similar pattern?

 

Traditionally, girls have been brought up to be much more compliant than boys;
in the past, a girl who engaged in a great deal of physical activity was labelled a
tomboy and this more conformistattitude extended to speech. Females are almost
universally responsible for childrearing and are expected to display a model

of correct behaviour to their children; this includes speech and conversational
patterns.

Social changes are taking All of the above paints rather a dismal picture of inarticulate male speech,
place for males and females which is clearly not the case. In fact, more recent studies have not shown the
in all parts of the world. expected degree of difference between men and women, with many adolescent
Discuss how far these girls using non—standard language as well as a level of assertiveness traditionally
changes might affect male associated with male language. Men too may not need to display such domineering
and female language. I conversational practice as the changing gender roles in society lead to greater

equality in language.

ACTIVITY 5.27

Analyse the transcript below with particular reference to features of
discourse. Can you observe any characteristics relevant to gender?

in their late 205. This is an extractfrom their conversation with Madeline’s
cousin, Freya (F). They have not seen Freyafor nearly two years, and they are
chatting to her about the details ofhow they met and their weddingplans.

F it’s so good to see you two (.) you both look so happy  well (1)
really happy and I’m so glad we have ﬁnally got to meet up before
the wedding  how long till you get married  I’m so pleased to be
coming//

M // well not long really is it Al  three months  and ﬁve days(.) er 
four days actually (.) it’s on Jan 26th  am so excited  can’t wait—//

A is it that close (.) well yes um (.) should be great fun in..  a winter
wedding in Wales (.) we could get snowed in//

\H*Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

// us and all our guests  that would make for a different wedding
(laughs) but (.)//

// we love the country house where we’re having the ceremony  the
people are fab  really helpful and there will be big ﬁres burning so
we’ll be cosy if it snows  a real White wedding and//

// Why January (.) it could be freezing  you could be snowed in (.)

well (worse) nobody could get there  sorry to sound a bit negative (.)
but//

// well  you know (.) I thought that a winter wedding would be good
because nobody will expect good weather and  so if it’s a sunny day
that’s a bonus but (.) you know (.) it could rain even in summer  so it’s
going to be awesome and I’m so glad you’ll be there with Auntie Debra
(.) I can’t imagine why we haven’t seen each other for ages (.) I think I’d
only just met Al hadn’t I (.) I mean when I last saw you  yes because
you were going travelling around India with your two friends from uni
 Auntie Debra told me you had an awesome time with only a few
adventures and problems (.) what was it like (.) did you want to stay
longer  I heard you cut it short//

that’s a long story  I’ll tell you about that later (.) but you tell me
about how you guys met  well I sort of know but ﬁll me in (.) I did
meet you at mum’s ﬁftieth party Al  but I was in charge of food and
 do you remember I had to make a speech  scary that  so we
didn’t get to talk or anything so I don’t know all the details  it was
when you were both working in the theatre (.) right

You’ve got a good memory  yes it was so funny because I was stage
managing the show (.) and Al and I used to talk back stage and then
he asked me out for dinner  and it was so nice ‘cos we had a lot in
common— well the theatre and performing for a start(.)//

(lung/95) // yes well  she was a bit bossy back stage  she even made
a point about me on a show report that I had missed an entrance  in
Act II one evening but I’ve forgiven her (1) I think  [dug/M.) so let’s
say  it went on from there and we’ve been  um sorta  able to get
jobs together and now I’m in TV production (.) so we’re in one place

and//

// and I’ve been able to get a job in the Arts Centre (.) which I’m so
pleased about (.) and then (.) well we both knew we wanted to be
together and  Al asked me to marry him

Aah  that’s so cool  I’m so pleased for you both and I’m even more
pleased to be coming to the wedding  will it be a big wedding  will
all the family be coming(.)

Think everyone we’ve asked has said yes  so it’ll be a great big get
together (.) friends and family (.) Anne and Charlie are coming across
from Canada  and my godmother, Carol, is aiming to get here from

Sydney

it will be such a fantastic time and (.) special (.) really special.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

209