Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

I the writer/role: someone from the travel company (the same writer as the
original)

the purpose/type of text: to promote the trek, still an online promotion
the style of the text: to be based closely on the original

the length: 120—150 words

the content/context: the different elements you must include — just the opening;
diITerent means of transport and own country.

ACTIVITY 2.1

Read this similar task.

1 The following passage is part of a speech delivered by Hilary Clinton,

wife of the American president at the time. In it she considers the issue of
women’s rights.

(a) Comment on the style and language of the passage.

((9) The same speaker delivers another speech to an international
audience. In it she considers the rights of Children. Write the opening
of her speech (between 120—150 words). Base your answer closely on
the style and language of the original extract.

Cambridge International AS and A Level English Language 8693
Paper 1 (May/June 2011), Q1. a, b.

On your own, note down:

the writer/role (whose perspective you will be Writing from)
the purpose/type of text

the style (if stated)

the length

the content/context (different elements, if any, you must include or
change).

Further practice
Write a response to the task given in Activity 2.1.

Same material, different perspective

In directed writing tasks you may also have to use the material in a different way, or
write from a new person’s perspective.

Look again at the restaurant review on page 56 in Unit 1: Reading non-ﬁction
and this directed writing task:

Another reviewer visits the same restaurant at the same time, but has a diﬂerent
viewpoint on his/her dining experience. Basingyour answer closely on the material
ofthe original extract, write the opening section (120-150 words) ofthe review.

Remember that you would need to bear in mind the following points;

I the writer/role: this will be a different reviewer (not the original one)
I the purpose/type of text: this is the same — to review the meal/visit

I the style: this is not mentioned, but as it is a review you should use similar
language features and conventions as those in the original passage

 

67Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

There is a follow—up task in the
section on Planning directed
writing responses on page 71.

00 6 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

 

ACTIVITY 2.2

Now read this similar task based on the same passage: ' i

The manager ofthe restaurant writes a letter to the reviewer complaining
about his review. Basing your answer closely on the material of the original
extract, write the opening section (120—150 words) of the letter.

Note down:

the writer/role (whose perspective you will be writing from)

the likely purpose/type of text

the style

the content/context (what elements to include, what Viewpoint, etc.)

Discuss with a partner:

I What are the main differences from the original text?
I What do you think the main challenges will be?

I the content/context (what elements to include, what Viewpoint, etc): the
viewpoint is to be diﬁerent; the original was very negative, so it is implied that
your response should be a positive one. You only have to write the opening section
of the review, so this might deal with the arrival and ﬁrst course, for example.

Whether the tasks require you to maintain a similar voice and style, or to take on
a new role or perspective, the important thing is to take what you can from the
original passage and shape it carefully to your needs.

Remember:

I directed writing tasks will be short texts of 125—150 words based on a passage
you have already commented on

I read the questions carefully to identify whether it is a ‘style’ or ‘material’ type
of question, and perhaps, even a combination of the two (e.g. as shown in the
restaurant review task above).

Approaching ‘writing for a specified
audience’ questions

In this section, you will:

I read a range of typical tasks with this focus

I learn how to identify the key aspects to base your response on.

What is ‘writing for a specified audience’?
When you write for a speciﬁed audience the task is likely to:

tell you what voice or perspective you need to write from

I set out the type and purpose of text you will be expected to write, as it will not
be based on a passage you have already read. In some cases, the audience or
likely reader will be mentioned, or implied by the type of text mentioned.

I give guidance on the mood or tone you are required to create though those
words may not be mentioned (the word sense may replace them).Part 1

 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 

“P . . . Read this typical task:
m exam situations, Spec|f|ed

audiences can be defined
quite broadly by age, gender,
shared interests, family/
social roles, hobbies or other

aspects of lifestyle.

7he owner of a shop writes an article called Small change. The article discusses the
challenges and rewards ofstarting a small business. Write the textfor the article. In
your writing, create a sense ofexcitement but also the worries that such a path can
bring. You should write 600—900 words.

«V ,« A slumwnmjﬁ‘,

 

 

 

 

From this, you can see that:

the text type is an article (magazine or newspaper)
the purpose is to discuss

the writer/role (the person you have to ‘pretend’ to be) is a small business owner/
shop keeper

the content is the challenges and rewards ofstarting a small business
the tone (referred to as sense here) is one of excitement but also worries
the length is 600—900 words (just one article).

,/i
rm”

To write a successful response to the task, you will need to:

Draw on what you know about the conventions of a magazine or newspaper
article: this might be related to form/layout/structure, typical modes of address
to readers, likely vocabulary, turns of phrase, and so on.

Imagine yourself in the shoes of the writer: what kind of things might he/she
choose to write about? What ‘voice’ will he/she have? Level of formality or
informality?Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

I Draw on what you know about how to create a ‘sense’/mood/tone: for example
particular vocabulary, ﬁgures of speech, types of sentences, etc. )

I Think about the purpose of the text and what writing techniques that suggests. ‘
In this case, there is discussion; what devices and ways of writing ﬁt this
purpose?

I Plan the content/structure: what challenges and rewards will you mention? How I
will you start, develop and end your piece?

Here are some brief notes written by one student after considering the task:

ACTIVITY 2.3

Consider these questions:

I think that as it is an article about a small business then it shouldn’t
read like a story, as such, more like an exploration ofthe main issues.
Of course, it is written for an audience  the newspaper or magazine
readership  so it must interest and engage them, not lecture them.

I know that newspaper articles usually begin with key information in
the first paragraph or so, but this is not a news report as such, so that g I
might not work. I need to sound well-informed and also give a balanced  :  '
view (challenges and rewards)  this isn’t all about the difficulties! To : ’

I How well do you think
the student considered
what he or she has to do?

I Are there any elements he
or she has left out of their

3 ~‘ w—wmw—«z -_-mn<ng~ ‘

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

th' k' ? . . .
1-H .mg ‘ . ' , keep readers interested, I might need to include some sort of personal
I Thls 13the_ thmkmg part anecdotes and information about myself. Hmm. i could start with that
— the readmg 0f the taSk perhaps an anecdote.

carefully. What should
the student do next?

 
   
  
    
 

TIP

Make sure you select the kind of language appropriate to the specified form,
purpose and intended audience. A magazine feature aimed at an older reader (if
specified) may not make use of the same words and phrases as one intended for
teenage readers.

ACTIVITY 2.4 '

Here is a similar task.

2 Now write some brief notes for yourself about the task
and the required style, etc. Use the example on the
previous page to help you. You could start: As this is
for a competition, and is about ‘priorities’, I will need
to write in a

A newspaper invites its readers to enter a competition
called What This Country Needs by sending in articles
exploring contemporary issues. Write one such article.
In your writing, create a sense ofwhatyou think are
essentialpriorities and the reasonsfor them. 3 In pairs, read these three extracts from students’
responses to the task. Judging from what you have
discovered by analysing the task, decide which is
closest to the style required. ‘

1 Note down:
I the text type

I the Purpose A Who really cares what our country needs? I ’m a

happy-go-lucky kinda guy and I’m not really too .,
fussed about this sort of thing. ‘Cos I ’d really prefer i
to hang out with my mates and talk ‘bout music,
baseball  the usual, y’know 

I the writer/role (the person you have to ‘pretend’ to
be, if anyone)

I the content

I the tone (referred to sense here)

I the length (600—900 words; one text or more?)fsvery importantthatyou
piywhatyou have learned
he to the practice tasks you
icomplete at the end of this
it on pages 108—109.

7713 president looked through the shaded
Windscreen. ‘Who do these people think they are?’
he thought, as the chauﬁeur prepared to drive on
to his private residence. Outside, protesters were
waving placards and shouting, their faces sweating
in the heat of the midday sun. ‘Turn on the air-
am,’ he told the driver.

 
   
   
  

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

C Trying to decide what the priorities for our country
are is like selecting a perfect present for a relative;

' you need to know all about them before you
choose. Get it wrong, and you waste huge amounts
of money,- get it right, and you make someone very,
very happy. 80, let us begin by brieﬂy looking at
what needs putting right. In other words, let us get
to know that relative as best we can 

Of course, this is just the start of the process. However, identifying the sorts of
elements and the kind of tone and style you will need for your own text is very
important. The next thing to consider is planning the structure of your response.

Summary

Remember these key points from this section:

I Read the task carefully, identifying the key words or phrases.
I Use the clues in the task to help you gauge what is needed in your response.

I Make sure you are able to identify as much as you can about the type of text; the

writer/role (if there is one); the form; the audience and purpose; the content and
tone.

Planning written responses

In this section, you will learn how to:

I plan and structure written responses.

Planning directed writing responses

As directed writing responses are so short, a detailed plan or structure is generally
unnecessary and is not a good use of your time. However, spending two or three

minutes quickly listing key words or phrases from the wording of the task will be
useful.

It is also very important to think about — and perhaps plan — your very ﬁrst

sentence or line. This will set the tone for the rest of your response. For example,
let’s look again at this task:

Another reviewer visits the same restaurant at the same time, but has a diﬁerent
viewpoint on his/her dining experience. Basingyour answer closely on the material
of the original extract, write the opening section (120—150 words) of the review.

lhe original review:

begins with a description of the building
mentions the price of the meal
moves on to the lighting

they have a pre-meal drink (‘Kia’Royal).

Based on this, you could structure your alternative review around what you

thought about the building, the cost, the lighting and a pre—meal drink (probably a
different one).

However, You could also begin with sitting down for the meal (the starter) and
then mention some of the other things in ﬂashback, or in a different order.

3

71Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

The main thing is to remember that as this is a restaurant review, you must Stick
to commenting on décor, drinks, atmosphere and food. So, a quick plan, whether
written or mental, might be:

I arrival — very welcoming staff

I drink — say what it is, describe delicious taste

I décor — the brightness, how you liked it compared with dingy places you’ve
eaten in before 

I starter — the mushrooms and stilton, describe positively 

Further practice
If you like, have a go at writing the review. You could begin: The friendly staﬁr 1 .1 ‘
standing at the door to take our coats was a welcome surprise, and complemented the _v 
attractive building with its...

ACTIVITY 2.5 p 2

Write a four or ﬁve point list setting out your plan/what you would cover for   f
the following task, which you were introduced to in the previous section: ' l

The manager of the restaurant writes a letter to the reviewer complaining
about his review. Basingyour answer closely on the material ofthe original
extract, write the opening section (120—150 words) ofthe letter.

Be careful: would this letter cover exactly the same things as the reviewer?
Would a letter, for example, start in a different way?

Further practice

Once you have jotted down your plan, write the letter.

Planning longer written responses

The challenge when writing longer responses in an exam situation is that you have
between 600 and 900 words to write. Even if the task requires two written responses
(for example, two letters or scripted speeches), this is still a minimum of 300 words
each. So for these longer responses it is important to create a plan before you start
writing.

The precise content of your plan will reﬂect the task, the text type and the
purpose (where known). For example:

I issue-based texts (i.e. to argue or discuss a topic) are likely to be organised by
ideas or viewpoints

I descriptive or personal texts (e.g. travel accounts, memoirs) are more likely to
be organised by time (speciﬁc moments or experiences), features (e.g. change
of place, location), people (e.g. new characters) or by changing, or developing,
emotions

I persuasive texts are likely to be organised by reasons, promotional features, etc.

In some cases, these aspects will intersect and work as hybrid forms, so this is only
a guide.
However, there are some useful success criteria for planning written responses:

I begin by identifying the key words/phrases in the task as you have learned
from the previous section (the text type, audience, purpose, etc.)

69TIP

mor

if yo

stage-

   
  
   
 
 
 
  
 

 
    
   
    
 

YOU must create your plans
and ideas quickly, taking no

e than five to ten minutes.
They need not be as detailed
as the ones shown here, and,
u’re confident, you might
be able to miss out the ideas

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

I generate key ideas, features, events, etc. by using spider—diagrams or other ‘idea
shower’. This might be one, or perhaps two, diagrams. For example, look again
at the following task:

The owner of a shop writes an article called Small change. The article discusses the
challenges and rewards ofstarting a small business. Write the textfor the article. In
your writing, create a sense ofexcitement but also the worries that such apath can
bring.

For this, you could create three very quick ‘idea showers’. For example, the ﬁrst
could deal with the imaginative content you have to invent; the second with the
challenges to be discussed; and the third with the rewards.

  
  

  
    
  

small convenience store
selling a range of goods

used redundancy money
to get it started

  
   

wife and two sons help
run it

   

opened five years ago

 
 

takes time to establish advertising costs

lack of experience challenges

competition

over-stocking,
under—stocking

very tiring/
time-consuming

 

  

business to hand on
to my children

rewards

 
     
 

happy customers

 
 

ACTIVITY 2.6

Look at the third diagram: can you add at least three more rewards to the
diagram?

73