Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

 

  

Here are some good points about this response:
- ther elements
List any 0

which show the writer has
managed to imitate the style

of the original text.

I it offers an apparent compliment using noun phrases (his acclaimed

performance) followed by instant criticism of the star (he’s trying way
too hard)

I it employs a harsh direct statement followed by understatement (He’s
got guts  Yet he’s not really that brave]

COMMENT

Now look again at the review of the restaurant on page 56 in Unit 1. Here is a
possible directed writing task for this piece:

ESgEVARVCH

The owner of the restaurant remembers the visit of the original reviewer but

has a diﬁerent view of the experience. Basingyour answer closely on the material
ofthe original extract, write a section (120450 words) ofthe owner’s own blog
entry.

Draft a quick response to this task. Remember:

I the key thing here is that the ‘material’ should be similar, in other words, cover
similar ground (arrival of the reviewer, décor, drinks, starter, price/value, etc.)

 

I you are not being asked to write a review so you do not need to imitate the style
of the original; however, you should think about the conventions of blog entries
— the fact that they are a form of public diary.

ACTIVITY 2.20

1 Compare your draft with a friend. Have you both:

I changed the Viewpoint?

I used material from the original extract?

I written in a style that matChes that of similar reviews?

Mark up each other’s drafts and then rewrite, improving where needed.
2 Now, plan a response to this longer task for a speciﬁed audience:

To celebrate the fact that a local cinema has been open for 25 years, the
owners have asked for reviews of any favourite movies which have been
released in that time. They will publish the reviews on their website. Write a
review ofanyﬁlm you have seen (real or imagined) and create a sense of the
emotions it stirs and why it is so enjoyable. You should write between 600 and
900 words.

For your plan, you could jot down notes using this framework:

I introduction: the name of the ﬁlm, when it was released, who it starred,
etc.

I body of the review: comments on the action/plot; characterisation/cast/
acting; locations (if important); cinematography; music and/or special
effects; its impact on you as a Viewer

I conclusion: what makes the ﬁlm so special, and why it will endure.

Further practice
Write the full review.

89Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

Speeches, voiceover scripts and debates
In an exam situation you may be asked to write:

I either a section (120—150 words) of a speech or two contrasting speeches which
' KEY TERMS make up a debate of 600—900 words.

I either a section (120—150 words) of a script or a more developed voiceover script ‘
of 600—900 words.

Scripted speeches are planned speeches given for a purpose. These may be
persuasive, or recount key or interesting events in the speaker’s life that make up
part of an explanation of the issue they wish to talk about.

Voiceover scripts may be in the form of a script for a voiceover for a promotional
ﬁlm or video, a radio or television programme or a podcast. The focus here is not
on references to sound effects, camera angles and so forth but on the text itself.
As with website, newspaper and magazine articles and features, you should not be
concerned with the layout and design of your text.

The conventions for speeches, scripts and debates will largely depend on the
purpose; so for persuasive speeches you would be expected to include rhetorical
devices; but more explanatory speeches or scripts might not require them.

Regardless of the particular purpose of the text:

 

 

I try to give a good sense of the ‘voice’ of the speaker/s
I remember to write in the ﬁrst person

 

Look again at the key features in I c0nsider how tenses might play a part (Le. talking about the situation now, or
some ofthe speeches in Unit 1 what is to come).
a on pages 58—63.

3 i 3 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Remember that you should
focus only on your writing.

You don’t need to include . .
instructions for sound effects Now read the task below and the sample student response that follows it.

   

. e..,_mwwmqm rmm-Wmmwewvmemw Ar

or other technical issues but
you may wish to use a few
stage directions here and
there.

Write the scriptfor a voiceover ofa radio programme aimed at a teenage audience
called Brave New World. In the programme, a student on the point ofleaving school
describes her or his thoughts andfeelings about moving into a new stage oflife. In
your writing, create a sense ofthe hopes andfears that the narrator is experiencing.

   

So, I’vejust finished the long and really nerve—shattering process of
taking my exams and now i’m just waiting for the results, feeling very
scared and worried about what’s actually goingto happen. i’ve actually
read and been told that waiting to see if you’ve got into Uni and finding
out if you have or you haven’t is actually really more stressful than being
there.

I go round to my friends’ houses and we always talk about ‘what if
he makes it and I don’t? What will I do? What will people say? Will we still
see each other?’ We’re all a bit nervous, to say the least. The number of
nightmares i’ve had these last few weeks about results day — they’ve all
had these different kinds of mad monsters. I’ve just got this image of me

.y,
l
i
f
‘u.
E
5

SAMPLE RESPONSEUnit 2: Writing non-fiction

 

waiting for the results at school and there’sjust the shadow of a monster
waiting around the corner ready to get me: i don’t get the grades i need
and this shadow looms towards me

Results day is getting really close now and I’m getting more and more
tense, not eating properly, not sleeping properly. it’s all like some kind
of monster reality coming toward me. l’m really scared what my mum’s

going to say if I don’t get the grades ! need. ‘Why didn’t you revise more?
Why didn’t you listen to what I told you?’...

91

 

ACTIVITY 2.21

1 How well does this speech work? Copy and complete this table, which lists

some of the key success criteria. Add examples as evidence of the speech’s
success.

    
 

   

Feature I Example

inner thoughts and emotions feeling veryscared and worried . ..
Appropriate to audience

Use of appropriate tenses to convey
feelings now and in future
Use of images or unusual vocabulary
to engage listener

2 Now continue the voiceover. (Your ﬁnal piece of writing, including the 1
sample section, should be 600-900 words.)Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

TIP
When planning a response to this question, you should:

imagine individual scenes the narrator may experience at this point in his or
her life

try to capture some of the style and language used in the sample opening
section to the piece (e.g. use of abbreviations like Uni)

express innerthoughts through questions
refer to the elements, such as friends and parents, that surround the writer
convey a sense of immediacy by the use of the present tense.

 

Promotional texts

Promotional texts may include advertisements, material from brochures, leaﬂets _
and so on. However, the deﬁnition can be expanded to include texts which promote 
a particular view on a topic, such as two people conveying different opinions about 7

E
y
i
r
r

the same event they have attended.

The wide range of skills required to promote a location, or persuade someone
to buy something, mean that any list of key features and conventions is reductive.
Many of the persuasive features of promotional texts, such as use of images, size
and type of font, colours, are not relevant here as the focus is on language. However,
it is possible to differentiate between two key techniques, which are relevant to
most, if not all, promotional writing. These are the soft sell and the hard sell
approaches.

Soft sell is where more persuasive, gentle methods are used to promote
products or ideas and there are appeals to lifestyle, through images or
ideas conveyed to the reader. For example:

Imagine the warm air1 cosseting you as you stroll along,2 stretches of

sandy beach.3

1 and 3 are noun phrases which appeal to the senses
2 is a verb phrase which places the reader in the scene

Hard sell tends to stress essential matters of value and practicality. For
example:

Want a Caribbean beach holiday which doesn’t cost the earth?1 Look no
further? 7 nights for just 29499.3

1 direct appeal to reader’s idea of value
2 fairly blunt short sentence
3 a minor sentence (no verb) which bluntly states the cost.

ACTIVITY 2.22

On your own, consider these questions:

I Are there any particular products or experiences which lend themselves
more to one approach than the other?

' I Why?Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

 

’ In order to explore how to apply these techniques in your own work, read these
' two extracts from promotional material for two different cars.

CarA

It’s not just the quality you Will appreciate.

While the rugged good looks of the new BMW are everything you would
expect from a vehicle, the details are equally impressive. From the highest l "
quality Dakota leather to the ﬁner points of efﬁcient dynamics and the new ‘ l :
generation twin—power turbo diesel engine, this is a car at home in crowded /
cities or the open countryside.

No matter Where you decide to drive it, the car was born to perform. I "
Combining impressive efﬁciency with agile rear—Wheel drive characteristics, ;
the BMW makes any destination a pleasure to get to. At this price, the pleasure ‘
goes beyond the performance.

CarB

Like attractive design? Need a spacious interior? Want modern technology, but don’t want to break the bank? Say hello to Dacia
Sandero.

93

Big car features.

Beneath its svelte form lies ample space
forﬁve adults. A split—folding rear seat and
320 litre boot make transporting luggage
simple. Electronic Stability Control, anti—
lock brakes and four front airbags ensure
safety as standard. And, with Sandero
Laureate, air conditioning and cruise
control mean maximum comfort on the
move.

Small car prices.

At Dacia, we believe in giving you the
Choice to pay only for what you value.
That’s why our comprehensive standard

3 year/60,000 mile warranty may be
extended up to 7 years/i 00,000 miles. Our
Simple range offers three trim levels to suit
your individual needs: from the affordable
Access to the luxurious Laureate. And,

with prices starting from just £5,995 on—
the»road, there really is a Dacia Sandero for
everybody.