Unit 7: Child language acquisition

Ages two to three — including the telegraphic stage

During this period and thereafter there is a huge increase in the vocabulary actively
used by the child, often by as many as ten words per week. Rough estimates give

a vocabulary of about 2000 words by the age of ﬁve and many of these words are
acquired between the ages of two and three.

The name of this stage of language development is taken from

telegrams, which were printed out from a telegraph machine from the
late 19th to the mid-20th centuries. Telegrams were used to deliver

urgent messages and, because they were paid for according to number

of words, they were usually very brief and only key information was
included, for example Arriving Kuala Lumpur 9pm.

Children have to learn to express their meaning using their limited vocabulary.
This often causes overextension, when a word is used more broadly than it should
be. This occurs at a very early stage of language acquisition. For example, the word
daddy might be applied to all men; a sibling’s name may be used for other children;
and words for items with distinctive properties, such as plate, may be used for a
other things sharing those properties (e.g. a full moon). This is quite a common
feature of language acquisition at this age as the child begins to notice more of the
world around them.

Overextension sometimes gives way to underextension, where a word is used in
a very narrow context. For example, a child may use shoes to mean his or her shoes
but no one else’s.

The telegraphic stage follows on from the two—word stage, where a child’s
utterances become longer and more grammatically complex, and complete
utterances emerge although some parts may be missing. The words now have a

greater purpose than simply identiﬁcation of people and objects, but are they still
condensed. Look at the following examples:

food allgone

mummy come home
we going now?

dada getjaice

Asma not sharing ball

The child is now much more linguistically coherent. The word order is usually
straightforward with subject (food) and verb (gone) though often omitting the
auxiliary words (is). Additional information such as prepositions (to, from, under,
by), determiners (the, a) and inﬂections/sufﬁxes to show tense and person (—ed, ~ing,
—s) are omitted in the early telegraphic stage but appear over time.

Pronunciation difﬁculties still continue. The child is able to produce a wider
range of consonants: p, t, d, n, w, f, v, a, with k, g, and ng following later. Other
more difﬁcult sound combinations are Sh, Ch, j and th, the latter being one of the
more difﬁcult sounds to say. Where children cannot say polysyllabic words, they
abbreviate, for example banana becomes nana. Interaction with adults shows the

child the correct form of the utterances spoken by the adult who is conversing with
them.

 

 

 

255