Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

Reading is a core skill which underpins both AS and A2 English Language. It helps
you to understand a range of different types of writing and also helps you to Shape
your own written responses in the light of the effects and techniques that you
encounter.

In this unit you will explore different forms and genres of non—ﬁction writing.
You will have opportunities to:

I analyse and interpret texts in a range of ways
Q LINK I explore the techniques writers use and the effects they create

The teChmqueS, eﬁeCtS and I plan and develop the skills needed to write your own extended commentaries

forms ofwriting you will meet in on language and Style
this unit will inform and help you

with your own writing in Unit 2:
Writing non-fiction aspect of the course.

READING AND WRITING SKILLS
Types of question, language and style

In this section you will:

I link what you have learned to the requirements of the ‘Writing non—ﬁction’

I consider what non—ﬁction is and the sorts of texts you might encounter
I look at a range of commentary—style questions
I explore what language and style are.

What is non-fiction?

When we talk about non-ﬁction, we generally mean writing which is rooted in real
experiences and which draws on factual information for its core content. Fiction
LOOk for the common feat“ res generally refers to writing that is largely imaginative or invented. Yet non—ﬁction
thaltliction and “oﬁ'fiétlc’” writing can share many of the same features as ﬁction writing, for example a
WHtmg Share; the dlv'smn description of a real—life trip to a vibrant city might share many of the same vivid
between them may be less
Wide than you think style features as the depiction of an imagined city in a novel.

However, most of the extracts you are likely to encounter for examination would
be largely categorised as ‘non—ﬁction’ though they will be drawn from a wide range

of sources.

 

ACTIVITY 1.1

With a partner, look at the diagram opposite.

1 Which of these would you generally consider to be 2 Which of the non-ﬁction texts you have identiﬁed I
‘non-ﬁction’ — that is, largely based on real-life events, I do you think would be closest in style to ﬁctional 
people or places? writing? Why? LUnit 1: Reading non-fiction

autobiography

 

   

   
      
  

advertisements

 
 
 
    
 
 

personal memoirs

 
 
 
 

information leaflets

  
  

magazine articles

travel or holiday brochures

    

newspaper features text types

  

short stories

podcast

  

political or campaigning
‘ speeches

 
    

personal letters

 
 

Types of question

This section of the book deals mainly with your understanding of and commentary
on non—ﬁction passages you read, but bear in mind that what you take from these
passages will also inform your ‘Directed writing’ tasks. More importantly, though,
you need to understand what it is you are being asked to do.

Passage—based questions may ask you to:

Comment on the style and language ofthe set extract.

In this case, the questions are fairly open and would expect you to range widely in
your response, covering a number of factors.

Or these questions may go further and ask you to address your analysis towards
a particular angle, for example:Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

TIP

Aspects such as purpose,
audience and context will

not always be apparent, or
even relevant, when you

read passages for analysis,
but keeping them in mind is
useful and can help you focus
your analysis.

 

I Comment on the ways in which language and style are used to present the
relationship between 
I Comment on the ways in which language and style are used to persuade the

audience to 
I Comment on the ways in which language and style are used to present the

writer’s attitude towards 

In the latter examples, you are given more guidance with references, perhaps to
comment on:

I the writer’s purpose or attitude (i.e. to present, to persuade, etc.)
I particular aspects or focuses (Le. a relationship, a place, an event).

ACTIVITY 1.2

On your own, look at this question about a passage taken from a travel
account:

Comment on the ways in which style and language are used by Paul Theroux
to present his attitude towards the people he meets in the stadium.

With a partner discuss:

I Whose style and language should you focus on?
I What particular purpose of the writer should you address?
I What or who in the passage must you consider?

What are style and language?

Understanding what style and language are may seem obvious, but it is important
you understand the sort of areas you are being expected to comment on.

Style
Style might be considered as everything that gives a particular text its unique and
individual ‘ﬂavour’. The ingredients that make up style will include:

I form: the shape, organisation and overall structure of the text

I language: the vocabulary, grammar, syntax, variety of sentences, choice of
tense, register and so on.

To understand the particular style and language of a text, or that a writer employs,
it is also helpful for you to explore:

I the purpose of texts (which may be explicit or implied), for example to
persuade, inform, or describe

I the audience or reader at whom the text is aimed (which can be speciﬁc or
general)

I the context of the text, for example when, where and how it was produced.

To get yourself thinking about style and language, begin by reading these three
different paragraphs from texts.Unit 1: Reading non—fiction

 

vendors who shout out their wares — these simply
add to the intoxicating recipe. You will soon be
hooked!

C All I can say is that the décor was more tasteful
than the food  and more colourful. My starter
was brown paté on brown toast  the effect
was, how shall I put it  er, brown and, if it is
possible for a colour to be a taste, it tasted brown,
or perhaps beige, which is even less powerful.
The starter’s lack of taste was only beaten by the

city as you arrive. This is one of its charms, and gloopy slop that came with my steak. The menu

just part of the heady brew that makes it such a said ‘Celeriac purée’, my plate said, ‘Wallpaper
wonderful and magical place to visit. The narrow paste’.

streets, the Old City with its minarets, the street-

A I had never felt so alone. The wide sweep of the
Andes stretched in front of me, a seemingly
inﬁnite expanse of ice and rock. The air cut into
my cheeks, and blinded me, as I stood unsteadily
looking down on the valley below. Then, for
a moment, the skies cleared above me, and I
saw a single, solitary condor rise on the breeze,
effortless and free. I would be that condor. I
would rise above my despair.

B Do not be put off by the noise and smell of the

mam. W. m». wwwquwmmimww mtg-awn «mm...» awww ,«vw‘w-r-uwt'ﬂﬁ‘owﬁ‘wmﬂﬁ—Iwnm-pﬂvwmwmyuﬁwmwmmmngwm inn—um... Wmuyi-wwwnvuxumv-v , twp-i wwﬂnmv. W W.  WV ﬂu, ,.,.,..,.t.,.,wr,w.,,,

ACTIVITY 1.3

1 With a partner, talk about each text in turn. Consider:

I the voice of the writer (Who is speaking? Do we know? What form
of address do they use? What tense? Is the tone humorous, reﬂective,
angry?)

I the formality or informality (How ‘close’ to the reader is the tone? Is it
chatty? Does it use speech-like language or punctuation?)

I other language choices (e.g. use of particular vocabulary)

‘ KEY TERMS

 

I the types or variety of sentence used (Short? Long? Simple?
Complex?)
I symbols or imagery
I the order or structure of the text (Does it matter? What can we learn
from it?). '
2 Share your ideas with another pair and then feed back responses to the rest
of the class or group.

I Did you ﬁnd a way of describing the style and language for each of
these texts?

I Did any of the texts share similar elements of style and language?
Which? How?

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Questions can be general and focus broadly on style and language, or can be
more speciﬁc and direct you towards key aspects.

I Understanding what style and language consist of will help you focus on the key
elements you need to comment on.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

_ Key reading skills for responding to passages

In this section you will:

I understand key success criteria for commenting on passages
I explore how to interpret selected words and phrases from texts
I evaluate commentary skills.

How to approach passage-based questions

Having a system for approaching passage—based questions is key to a successful
commentary on them. But what kind of things should you do in the reading and
writing stages?

Here are some key success criteria:

Do:

I read the text at least twice
I list or highlight key words and phrases from the text before you begin to write

I start your commentary with a clear, brief introduction in which you offer an
overview or framework for your interpretation of, or commentary on, the set

passage

I focus on what the writer does (the techniques he or she uses) and the features
presented

I describe the effects ofthose techniques and features on the reader

I I support what you say with well-chosen, selective evidence and apt quotation

I write in a coherent, fluent way which links rather than lists ideas

I keep yourfocus on style and language

I check your work as you write and tweak or adapt carefully to make sure your
expression is succinct, yet sufficiently detailed.

Don%:

I start writing before you have read the text properly

I simply list or highlight everything in the text (i) — be selective
I assert an idea or opinion without supporting evidence

I

simply ‘feature-spot’ — that is, point out a technique or a language device
without explaining its effect or purpose (for example, mention that the writer
has used alliteration without saying what its effect is)

I just summarise what happens or paraphrase without offering any commentary
or interpretation

I list points or ideas in an unconnected way
I drift off into discussing aspects outside the question set.

 

Read these two short paragraphs from students’ commentaries. You do not need to
have read the original passage but they are based on the extract from Shooting an
Elephant by George Orwell on page 9 of this unit.