Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

In biographical writing, you will:

I write mainly in the third person, unless the text is as much about revealing your
own character or relationships

I describe an event, conversation or experience which reveals something
signiﬁcant about the person you are writing about

I adopt a clear position and sense of voice about the person, perhaps conveying
approval or disapproval in the way material and expression are selected.

Look again at the extract about the writer’s father on pages 49—50 in Unit 1. Now
read this task:

Later, the writerpahlishes afurther article after hisfather takes up another interest.
Basingyoar answer closely on the style and language ofthe original extract, write a 
section (120—150 words) ofthe introduction. ’

Look at the sample response below and consider its effectiveness:

Be careful with those bricks’ I say to him. ‘IT’S GREAT’ he shouts ‘I’VE
ALREADY CHOPPED TWENTY TREES, MADE UP FIVE BUCKETS OF CEMENT
AND POLISHED LOADS OF MY TOOLS THIS AFTERNOON.’ My dad’s newly
kindled enthusiasm for his building scheme is already wearing me out.
Why not slow down? | enquire.

Experience tells me that asking this is the same as attempting to
n convince a dog to ignore a cat and chase a soft toy instead.

He keeps having these powerful visions about being a master

craftsman. ‘YESTERDAY | BUILT A SHED. AFTER DOZING AFTER LUNCH
I FOUND THIS HAMMER ON MY LAP. LOOK AT WHAT IT’S DONE TO MY
HANDS. l RANG THE RADIO STATION TO TELL THEM THEIR MUSIC WAS
AWFUL. NOT HAD A REPLY YET.’

LLI
m
z
0
a.
m
Lu
n:
I.I.I
...l
a.
2
<
U)

   

 

 

TIP ACTIVITY 2.15

When aSked to write abOUt an 1 Discuss the good points about this response with a partner. Write these
‘interesting character’, you

are really being asked to make

 

features on sticky notes and attach them to the response. (You may need

m thn of .
someoneyouknow,orhave ore a one each)

heard of, sound interesting I characterisation of the father echoes the original

— they do not have to be a I similar comparisons
celebrity or have won Olympic

medals! I what the father says

 

I contrast between father and son

2 Once you have done this, make notes explaining the thinking behind
where you have placed the sticky notes and what they show.

3 0 ‘ FURTHER RESEARCHUnit 2: Writing non-fiction

 

1 Rather than complete a directed writing task on the same text, plan and write a response to extended writing task
for a speciﬁc audience.

A local website wants to honour ‘ordinary people: so it has asked users to send in a character portrait of someone local
they know well. Send in your entry (it can be for someone imaginary) and create a sense of that person’s individuality
and why they are sofascinating.

If you are struggling to come up with ideas, use this ideas board — either at random (close your eyes and stick a pin
in it!) or through choice.

An elderly relative who has survived A local business-person who has A young friend who has talents that
hardship and trouble. made a success against the odds. are likely to make him/her successful
in the future.

A kind person who has performed A teacher who has inspired you or A creative person, such as an artist
many generous acts. others. or writer, who lives an unusual,
somewhat mysterious life.

A homeless person who is getting Someone who does an unusualjob, A member ofthe family who is ‘larger
their life back on track. such as an undertaker. . than life’ and has a very strong
character!

 

2 Once you have decided you will need to note down:
I a location that person may be seen/found in
how they might speak/what they say
things they do/ how they behave 85
how you met them/ﬁrst came across them

a speciﬁc example or examples of your interaction or meeting with them.

i ' 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

   
 
 
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

Focus on the text, notthe
layout or design. For example,
you should not spend time
formatting your material

into columns or drawing

illustrations to accompany
the article.

 

Articles and features
In an examination situation you may be asked to write:

I either a section (120—150 words) of an article
I or a full feature or article (600—900 words).

You may be asked to write in the format of an article for a newspaper or magazine,
or perhaps for a blog. Whatever the format, you will need to have a clear structure

and make use of appropriate headlines and subheadings to divide the material into
sections. For example:

I Place the most important information (who? what? why? when? where?) at the
openingof the article in one or two initial paragraphs.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

I Develop with ‘body’ paragraphs that often record an excerpt from a Witness

‘ KEY TERMS ‘ .
account, or the words of an ofﬁc1a1 ﬁgure (e.g. a spokesperson for the police or

  

similar authority).

I End with a paragraph about the near future — what is about to happen (e.g. 
court hearing to be held on a certain date).

I Use a mixture of direct speech and indirect speech.

Extended articles and features may come up in ‘writing for a speciﬁed audience’
questions. They may draw on a number of other techniques: background material
about people or events, use of quotations or interviews, witness accounts, statistics
and surveys, more in—depth description and analysis where the writer’s own
observations may come into play. They are also more likely to divert from Standard
English to more informal usages, vocabulary and structures.

Read the text below, which offers advice to people attending music concerts.

 

look at them. Also, you see those guys
right in front ofthe stage with the giant
cameras? They’re taking great
professional pictures. There’s really no
need for yours.

«bmmw,m .

Checking e-mail, Facebook and

Twitter every couple of minutes
Unless you’re a surgeon or a ﬁreﬁghter,
everything can wait. Live in the moment,
Enjoy the show. You paid good money
to be here. You can e—mail your friends
when you get home. Also, that cellphone
emits a very harsh and distracting glow.

w « wywﬂ. mm, 
A - A

Incessantly talking to your friends
You might not like whatever song is
playing. You may be bored with the show
in general. You may have been dragged
here against your will. But you’ve been
chattering the entire show, and I can hear
every word. It’s driving me crazy, Please

,. My WNW:- ..,...w~.,, immvw

 

60mg to roFk cohcerts has always Taking pictures the entire Show shut up. Please. I can’t tell you how many 
meant dealing W'th a. bund‘ Of WWW | get it, You want to show all your friends shows l attend where the two people :
people bUt 't Seems l'ke latew thmgs on Facebook and Twitter that you saw a in front of me are yelling in each other’s

haVe been Worse than ever- Attemlon cool concert. Fineiake a photo. Take ﬁve ears the entire night. Not only is my

Spain?“ at an all‘t‘me low! and the t if you want! But please, don’t take 77. sightline blocked when their heads come
ubiqurty ofsmartphones has resulted in You arways manage to hold your camera together, but I can hearthem Maybe go

a hug? percentage Ofthe Wd‘ence at right in my line of Sight. YOU don’t even to a coffee shop when the show is done.

any g‘Ven‘ShOW bareb’ pay'ng memo” look like you’re enjoying the Show While Lie under an oak tree and talk until the

to the'ad'on Oﬂétage' Here are the WM you’re doing this. All your attention is on sun comes up. i don’t care. Just quiet

annoymg behaV‘Ors at rOCk concerts the photos. You’ll probably never even down so l can enjoy the show.

Andy Greene, Rolling Stone. ACTIVITY 2 17

Write a quick plan for an article using the structure on page 85 (opening
paragraphs 1—2, main body paragraphs 3—5, conclusion paragraph 6) for a
report into the sighting of an unusual or unexpected creature or animal in
your neighbourhood. (You need only write notes.)

 

@Unit 2: Writing non—fiction

 

ACTIVITY 2.18

1 Spend 5—10 minutes discussing with a friend what the key features and
style of this article are. You could consider:

I informal and formal usages
I length and type of sentences
I use of punctuation
l I mode of address (the way of speaking to the reader).

2 Then choose one of the following headings (which come from the rest of
the original article) and write one of the missing entries. They are:

I Yelling out requests

I Pushing your way to the front
I Filming the entire show on your phone i .
I Yelling ‘Sit down! ’ at people who are standing up. '

3 For a longer ‘Writing for an audience’ task, plan and then write a magazine
article (600—900 words) using some of the techniques and approaches of
the extract. It should be aimed at a teenage audience, offering advice and ‘
guidance about an issue which will be relevant and engaging for readers. l '
For example:

I How to survive a weekend at a rock or pop festival

 

I Making your room at home inviting for your friends to see/visit
Look back to the guidance on I Buying clothes for a party without spending a fortune
generating and Planning your I Making sure weekends aren’t boring by doing something useful or 87
ideas on pages 72—75. originaL

When planning a response which involves giving advice, remember to:

I Use the planning and generating ideas advice earlier in this unit, for example by
dividing the material into clearly deﬁned sections.

I Give reasons why you are offering advice about that particular section.

I Use repeated sentence structures [You might not like whatever song is playing.
You may be bored with the show in general. You may have been dragged here
againstyour will. But ...] followed by a word such as but or however which then
outlines the case against.

I Use imperatives and clauses [Take ﬁve you want! But please, don’t take 72]

I At certain points adopt informal language to make a connection with your
readers [Please shut up. Please]

I Vary sentence length and structures for effect — almost as if thoughts are
popping into your mind, or you are speaking them aloud [I get it. You want to
show all yourfriends on Facebook and Twitter thatyou saw a cool concert. Fine.
Take a photo]

I Insert occasional direct personal opinion [I can hear them. Maybe go to a coﬂee

shop when the Show is done. Lie under an oak tree and talk until the sun comes
up. I don’t care. lust quiet down so I can enjoy the Show]

All this suggests that you use a similar tone to the one in the sample passage. You
don’t have to do this of course, but bearing in mind the audience — teenagers — you
will need to make it engaging in some way.Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

Further practice

You have already written a plan for this question (see page 86) but for more practice
in writing for an audience, write the article as instructed. Use your original plan to
help you.

A magazine aimed at the over 505 publishes an article called Nothing to Fear. 7716
article tries to persuade readers that technology (such as computers, tablets and
smartphones) and the internet can bring beneﬁts to their lives. Write the article
(600—900 words). In your writing, create a sense ofenthusiasm and practical advice,

Reviews and writing to comment

In an exam situation you may be asked to write:

I either a section (120—150 words) of a review
I or a full review (600—900 words).

Reviews both comment on and describe an event or experience. They are a form of
persuasive writing in that the writer’s Viewpoint/opinion is key to the way the text works
Writing an effective review depends on:

knowing the kind of publication you are writing for and the intended readership

understanding what the reader wants to know

I
I
I knowledge and authority about the subject
I forming an overall opinion which will give the review a framework
I

relating any examples to that overall opinion and framework.
Reviews generally:

I provide an overview of the ‘key facts’ of the experience (e.g. prices, who played
what part, name of the restaurant)

I suggest the writer’s expertise or knowledge of the ﬁeld (e.g. theatre, ﬁlm, food)

I express opinion Via loaded language (positive and negative adjectives or Vivid
imagery)

I use exaggerated or humorous ideas through comparisons

I adopt informal, chatty language designed to make contact with the reader.

Look again at the review of the ﬁlm on pages 54—55 in Unit 1. Here is a possible
directed writing task based on this review:

The writer ofthe review publishes afurther article about anotherﬁlm. Basingyour

answer closely on the style and language ofthe original extract, write a section
(120—150 words) ofthe review.

Does Brad Smith really know what he’s doing? Not long after his
acclaimed performance in The War Years he’s trying way too hard to
aretend he can capture the spirit of President Carter. He’s got guts
thinking he can put himself in the shoes of ‘one ofthe key figures of the
ate 20th century’, a figure no director would dream of attempting to
aortray. Yet he’s not really that brave. The way of playing Carter totters
along, like a young child trying on some high heels before crashing to the
floor in disbelief at how much they hurt. The stiff neck, the forced grin,
.he steely eyes; it’s like Smith is being prodded with a needle to get him
.0 show the ways and habits of Carter 

|.I.l
U)
2
O
D.
U)
Lu
n:
u:
.4
n.
E
<
m

 

 

l.)