Unit 7: Child language acquisition

 

TIP
As you are conversing with a

young child, be conscious of
the topics that interest them
and the type of vocabulary
and syntax they use.

 

Although young children can engage in a dialogue they cannot easily continue a
conversation without the input of the parent. Additionally, for the majority of their

pre—school years, and even for sometime afterwards, young children talk almost
exclusively about their immediate environment and activities.

ACTIVITY 7.3

Reading with young children provides enormous beneﬁts for their
development and the impact of reading on their language development is
immense.

1 Find a variety of picture and early reading books in your native language
at a level suitable for children under three years old. Describe the language
and layout of the pictures. In your opinion, how do they help maintain the
interest of the young child?

2 The child cannot yet read and must have someone to read to them.

Analyse the language used, for example the topics covered, the nouns,
adjectives and verb tenses used.

3 Carry out an analysis of the cultural context of the books you are reading
and the values which are being promoted.

4 Based on your research, try to produce a rough draft of the ﬁrst few pages
of an early reading book. You could do simple sketches to show how
each page would look, for example how you would position the text and
pictures.

Three to five years — continuing development

I Language development continues rapidly during this stage along with cognitive

and social development as the young child’s interactions with othersin their world
continue to broaden.
The following features of language develop at great speed:

connecting words (e.g. because, and, 
number words

words connected with emotions

family terms (e.g. auntie, brother)
colours

contrasting concepts (e.g. longer, bigger).

This broadening of vocabulary includes distinguishing hypernyms (words for
categories of things, e.g. animals; vegetables) and hyponyms (words within those
categories, e.g. cat, hamster; carrot, cabbage).

Young children learn thousands of new words by listening to parents, siblings
and other family members and guessing meaning from context. With a wider social
network, including attending play group and listening to stories, children of this
age understand many more words than they say. They begin to use longer words at
this stage, often words of three or more syllables (e.g. elephant and helicopter). They
often take great delight in saying new and complicated words.

Between the ages of three and ﬁve, children become increasingly competent in
their communication. Their increasing knowledge of syntax and vocabulary seems
to be accompanied by an understanding of the principles of inﬂection as past tenses

257Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

‘ KEV TER are added as well as plurals. Children make virtuous errors, applying regular
‘ a v I V ’ grammatical endings to words with irregular forms, for example runned, moases,
goed, swimmed, wented.

    

The Berko wug test

A famous experiment was carried out by Jean Berko (1958) to show

the application of grammatical rules by children. Young children

were shown a picture of an imaginary creature which Berko called a
wug. Clearly the children had not heard this name before. When they
were shown a picture of two ofthe creatures, children were asked to
complete the sentence There are two _. They applied the grammatical
principle of adding 5 for plurals and replied wugs.

Children between three and ﬁve become more ﬂuent, can handle greater
vocabulary requirements and are increasingly able to talk appropriately in different
situations, such as family and play group. By this stage they are using question
forms (Can I have one?) and negation (He doesn’t want one). They are now able to
use auxiliary verbs: do is the ﬁrst to appear, followed by can and will. Children may
duplicate modal verbs (Please may can I  ?), which might reﬂect an understanding
that may is required for manners, while can indicates the fact of being able to do
something.

I By this stage, children can handlemore complex utterances with two or more
parts. By the age of three, children understand that words Often have more than one ‘
meaning and although they inevitably mix things up, their ﬂuency is increasing. ,

Oscar (aged three) and his mother have been playing a game; this is the 1
conversation that followed:

 

l
OSCAR mummy I winned 
MOTHER NO, you won 
OSCAR I winned mummy
MOTHER NO Oscar, you won . '

OSCAR I not one I three

This mix—up of homophones — words which sound the same — show Oscar’s 
understanding of words which sound the same (one/won) but he does not grasp ‘
that they have different meanings.
Children start to understand idioms — expressions with non—literal meanings.
For example, in English, the idiomatic phrase you’re pulling my leg has nothing to 1
do with legs but means you’re teasing me. This understanding Of idiomatic aspects l
of language starts at around three years but is not fully learned until much later in
the child’s life. ?
By now you will be aware that the period from three to ﬁve is a time of massive 1
learning and consolidation for young children. They delight in chatter, ask lots of

8