Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

.0. FURTHER READING

ACTIVITY 3.19

On your own:

described

 

I make brief notes about the general location and then the two buildings

I what do these two descriptions suggest about the two characters?

Location as something that signals character, or suggests a way of life, is equally

strong in descriptive writing in memoirs.
Read the following passage:

I was not interested in the things which fascinated my
schoolmates: sports and spider hunting and ﬁghting
crickets for money. And because of my mixed parentage
I was never completely accepted by either the Chinese
or the English of Penang, each race believing itself to be
superior. It had always been so. When Iwas youngerI
had tried to explain this to my father, when the boys at
school had taunted me. But he had dismissed my words,
and said I was being silly and too sensitive. I knew then
that I had no choice but to harden myself against the
insults and whispered comments, and to ﬁnd my own
place in the scheme of life.

After school I would throw my bag in my room and
head for the beach below Istana, climbing down the
wooden steps built into the cliff. I spent my afternoons
swimming in the sea and reading under the shade of
the bowed, rustling coconut trees. I read everything
that my father had in his library, even when I did not
understand it. When my attention left the pages I would
put the book down and catch crabs and dig for clams
and crayﬁsh hidden in the sea. The water was warm
and clear and the tidal pools were ﬁlled with ﬁsh and

ACTIVITY 3.20

strange marine life. I had a little boat of my own and I
was a good sailor. [...]

There was a small island owned by my family about
a mile out, thick with trees. It was accessible only from
the beach that faced out to the open sea. I spent a lot
of my afternoons there imagining I was a castaway,
alone in the world. I even used to spend nights on it
during those periods when my father was away in Kuala
Lumpur.

Early in 1939, when I was sixteen, my father leased
out the little island and warned us not to set foot on
it as it was now occupied. It frustrated me that my
personal retreat had been taken from me and for the
next few weeks I spied out the activities that went on
there. Judging from the supplies being ferried across
by workmen in little boats, a small structure was being
built. I contemplated sneaking onto the island but my
father’s caution deterred me. So I gave up on it, and
tried not to think anymore about it.

And halfway across the world, countries that seemed
to have little to do with us were preparing to go to war.

From The Gift ofRa/n by Tan Twang Eng.

1 Discuss with a partner:

I What do we learn about the places the narrator goes to or visits in this

passage?

I Why were these places important to the narrator? What do they tell us

about him?

I In what way do these places have a more symbolic role to play in 3;
contrast with what is going on in the wider world?

2 Share your ideas with another pair and then write a short commentary on

the importance of place in this passage in revealing the character of the
narrator and his situation.Vivien Leigh as Scarlett O’Hara in the
film of Gone With The Wind.

Unit 3: Imaginative writing

Read the extract below from Gone With 7716 Wind, a historical romance. Here,

the writer integrates elements of the background and setting with the description

of Scarlett. In fact, you can see techniques in the description of Scarlett that are
similar to those related to landscape or place.

Scarlett O’Hara was not beautiful, but men seldom
realized it when caught by her charm as the Tarleton
twins were. In her face were too sharply blended the
delicate features of her mother, a Coast aristocrat of
French descent, and the heavy ones of her ﬂorid Irish
father. But it was an arresting face, pointed of chin,
square of jaw. Her eyes were pale green without a
touch of hazel, starred with bristly black lashes and
slightly tilted at the ends. Above them, her thick black
brows slanted upward, cutting a startling oblique
line in her magnolia—white skin — that skin so prized
by Southern women and so carefully guarded with
bonnets, veils and mittens against hot Georgia suns.
Seated with Stuart and Brent Tarleton in the cool
shade of the porch of Tara, her father’s plantation,
that bright April afternoon of 1861, she made a pretty
picture. Her new green ﬂowered—muslin dress spread
its twelve yards of billowing material over her hoops
and exactly matched the ﬂat—heeled green morocco

 

slippers her father had recently brought her from
Atlanta. The dress set off to perfection the seventeen-
inch waist, the smallest in three counties, and the
tightly ﬁtting basque showed breasts well matured
for her sixteen years. But for all the modesty of her
spreading skirts, the demureness of hair netted
smoothly into a chignon and the quietness of small
white hands folded in her lap, her true self was poorly
concealed. The green eyes in the carefully sweet face
were turbulent, willful, lusty with life, distinctly at
variance with her decorous demeanor. Her manners
had been imposed upon her by her mother’s gentle
admonitions 

Outside, the late afternoon sun slanted down in the
yard, throwing into gleaming brightness the dogwood
trees that were solid masses ofwhite blossoms against
the background of new green 

From Gone With The Wind by Margaret Mitchell.

131ACTIVITY 3.22

Think of any recent book
you have read, ﬁlm you

have seen, or play you have
attended. What would you
say its themes were? How did
they manifest themselves?
(i.e. how did you know this
was the theme?)

ACTIVITY 3.23

How do you think the apple—

tree might seem to symbolise
this event? (Think about
what fruit represents and

the state of the tree in the
yard.)

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

ACTIVITY 3.21

Look through the text and identify:

I references to the location, Scarlett’s background and her family

I ﬁlm/camera style techniques as how the writer uses her ‘lens’ to select and
focus on different parts of Scarlett and her clothes

I how contrasts and juxtapositions work to suggest where the drama of the
story might come from.

Further practice

Write a commentary based on these ideas. Make sure you explain the effect on the
reader and the style of the passage.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Writing about setting and location shares many similarities with other forms of
descriptive writing, for example character portraits.

I Think in terms of the writer using the pen like a camera to zoom in and out,
focus on and cut between things he or she wants to describe.

I Consider how characters can be associated with, or conﬂict with, particular
locations.

Themes, symbols and motifs
In this section, you will:

I consider the role of themes, symbols and motifs in imaginative writing
I apply what you have learned in short writing tasks of your own.

A theme is usually taken to mean a key idea, topic or area of interest which a writer
explores in his or her work. Themes are sometimes deﬁned in quite general ways
using abstract nouns or noun phrases such as conﬂict, atonement, hope, unrequited
love but can also be expressed as dualities such as fathers and sons or rich and poor.
Texts can contain many themes and readers may argue over what those themes
might be, so interpretation is an important part of the way themes are explored and
discussed.

A symbol is one way of understanding what a book’s themes might be. A
symbol can be an object, person, action or experience that represents a bigger
idea. In simple terms, we might say that a rose symbolises love or romance, but in
literature we may be looking for more subtle symbols.

The play All My Sons by Arthur Miller opens in the backyard of an American
house. In it there is:

afour-foot high stump ofa slender apple—tree whose upper trunk and branches lie
toppled beside it, fruit still clinging to the branches.

In the play we learn early on that the elder son of the household was killed ﬂying
planes in the Second World War. His body was never found. This event casts a
shadow over the story as it progresses.

 

 

r
l
E
E
l
lUnit 3: Imaginative writing

 

   
 
  
 
 
 
 

TIP
Try to find a range of ways of
saying It’s about It might be
better to say The text explores
the idea  or One theme of
the text might be  or The
writer seems interested in the

issue of...

HER RESEARCH

ACTIVITY 3.24

Can you think of any other
common motifs from
traditional tales? Consider
how those motifs have

been reﬁned or adapted for
modern texts, plays or ﬁlms.

 
 

 

 

Motifs are similar to symbols but are ideas that re—occur throughout a text
or a part of a text. The term is taken from music and relates to a repeated sequence
of notes, or tune, which comes back more than once across the piece. Motifs can
also refer to common conventions or patterns to stories, so, the handsome prince

who rescues a girl and marries her could be said to be common motif in fairy
tales.

Exploring themes, symbols and motifs in texts
Read this short extract, in which all three elements are combined.

The baby lay in a basket beside the bed, dressed in a whitebonnet and sleeper.
The basket had been newly painted and tied with ice blue ribbons and padded
with blue quilts. The three little sisters and the mother, who had just gotten
out of bed and was still not herself, and the grandmother all stood around the
baby, watching it stare and sometimes raise its ﬁst to its mouth. He did not
smile or laugh, but now and then he blinked his eyes and ﬂicked his tongue
back and forth through his lips when one of the girls rubbed his chin.

The father was in the kitchen and could hear them playing with the

baby. He had turned around in his chair and his face was white and without
expression.

From ‘The Father’ by Raymond Carver.

ACTIVITY 3.25

' Write answers to these questions:

I Are there any objects, items or people that could be said to symbolise or
represent an idea in the opening paragraph?

I In what way does the baby’s facial response suggest or imply something
about his character or nature (which runs counter to the earlier
description)? Think about what the idea of the ﬂicked tongue suggests or
might symbolise.

I How does the motif of the baby in the basket and his appearance link
with, or echo, the end of the extract?

I How is the extract as a Whole a reﬂection of a common literary motif?
(Think about myths and fairytales.)

I If you could suggest any themes (on this very limited evidence) for the
text as a whole, what might they be?

Sometimes, motifs and symbols enable writers to blend two scenes together. The
extract below is an example of a deceptively simple style of writing which conveys,
through the young voice of its narrator, a world in which the season and the
feelings of the protagonist reﬂect each other. The scene of the present is interwoven
with a scene from the past.

Read the extract and try to work out how the scenes are connected and how this
is established.

 

 

133Mrs Susan looks at me angrily — her eyes are the same
as Mama’s, but not the same. I am not really scared of
her anymore. There is nothing left she can do to me,
except do the things she’s done already again. She
throws some stale biscuit towards me, and storms out
of the house. I swallow the biscuit greedily, then pick
up my worn jacket. I put it on, and see the scratches
still forming on my pale arms. Where did they come
from? I step outside gingerly and breathe in the air and
surroundings. The cold air is here today, there is ice on
the roofs of the houses and buildings nearby. I shiver as
the metal wall sends a pulse of cold through my ﬁnger.
It isn’t snowing. I only ever saw snow once before,
when Mama took me to the mountains to show me

the ﬂowers, the birds and the trees. Mama liked their
colours and the patterns of the leaves. She called me
Calla, which is a kind of lily. Mrs Susan doesn’t call me
Calla, she calls me a witch. She tells me that I brought
a curse to their land and that is why the wheat won’t
come this year. Mrs Susan is stupid. Curses aren’t real.

Cambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

 

I slowly walk to the other side of the wheat ﬁeld.
It’s very big. There is an old wooden but there, and
that’s where I have to sit, grinding the wheat into ﬁne
powder for Mrs Susan to sell 

The birds circle over the wheat, black and
threatening. I don’t like birds either. One ﬂies towards
the woods. I need to go, to follow its shadow winging
across the ﬁeld. I follow it. I chase it until I reach the big
trees. Mrs Susan has told me never to go in there. But I
must follow. The trees loom tall and dark; there are no
leaves. It is like a big naked forest. They shield me from
the harsh, cold wind though. The bird has begun to
climb. I look up at it, but am instantly distracted 

‘Snow!’ I yell. Pure white ﬂakes are falling on my
naked feet. It is cold but I do not care. I hear a rustling
sound. I see a ﬁgure. It is Mama. ‘Mama! You are
back!’ I cry. I then feel Mrs Susan’s cold grasp, as she
pulls me out of the forest. Away from the birds, away
from the snow.

Anon

Read this opening to a student’s commentary on the text:

>.
D:
E
2
Lu
2
2
O
U

 

The idea ofthe cold (a word carefully repeated throughout) is
ambiguous. The outside world initially seems to reinforce the girl’s

cold treatment by the adult. However, by association the temperature
reminds her of warmer thoughts about her mother in a past happier
time (I only ever saw snow once before, when Mama took me to the
mountains to show me the flowers). This temporary relief is halted by the
thought of her current guardian and the mundane work the narrator has
to carry out.

Continue the commentary, focusing on the following elements:

I the birds and the forest and what they seem to represent (Is their depiction
consistent, or does the writer alter our perspective of them? Think about
conventional ways we might View such birds and such a forest.)

I what the motif of the snow seems to signal in terms of the narrator’s
emotions and character

I how does the text as a whole play on, or allude to, other myths and
fairytales? (Think about the role of Mrs Susan, the mother, the child, the

forest, etc.)

I how the cold as a motif links the teXt from start to ﬁnish.Unit 3: Imaginative writing

 

 

37"“?

Be careful when using motifs
and symbols that you don’t
tum your writing into a kind
ofpuzzle to be unlocked. Use
these devices sparingly and
remember that you must still
have an engaging story to tell.

 

Further practice

Write a section (50—175 words) of a modern story involving a child in a walled
garden.

 

Think about:

135
I the story: why the child is there, what he/she has done, or is going to do

I how you can make elements of the scene and situation echo mythical tales or
fairy-stories Without copying the originals directly

I using objects, clothing, natural features or the weather to represent or symbolise
other ideas

I how you might choose a motif to link the various parts of the story (e. g. a key
that is found, a particular plant or ﬂower, a bird or insect ...).

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Motifs and symbols can lend richness and texture to your writing, allowing you
to create layers of meaning and allusion.

I Use them sparingly.

I Consider how they can reveal or reﬂect key themes or ideas in yours and others’
writing.

Creating your own imaginative and
descriptive writing

The ﬁnal part of this unit deals with the process of planning and writing your own
imaginative texts. It addresses the importance of structure and how particular ideas
can be developed and expanded. Many of the skills which have been developed in
Units 1 and 2 will also be relevant here, especially in relation to organising a longer
text around key ideas or points, although this will be applied slightly differently
here.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Planning and structuring descriptive texts
In this section, you will:

I learn how to generate ideas for extended descriptive writing
I develop and apply planning and organisational skills.

It is vitally important that when you come to write descriptive pieces you approach
them with the same measure of planning as you would other types of writing, such
as persuasive articles or reviews. Ihink carefully about how you can ‘position’ the
reader in the ways that you have explored in this unit to help create an impact and
to make your writing vivid and engaging.

Developing ideas for an extended descriptive writing task

There are many ways you can approach a descriptive writing task. You will now
look at a sample task and consider how it could be tackled. This is a ‘complete
composition’, but it provides clues as to how to organise your response.

Write a descriptive piece called The Shower in which the narrator describes in
detail her or his experience ofbeing caught infalling rain. In your writing, focus on
colours and sounds to help your reader imagine the scene.

A student identiﬁes the following key words and phrases from the task:

I narrator, her or his experience
I shower, being caught infalling rain
I colours and sounds

135 It is a good idea to use either a list or spider-diagram format to put some ﬂesh onto
these details. At this stage, do not worry about how you will organise these ideas
in your writing. For now, you need to make this ‘skeleton’ come to life. Here is the
same student’s ﬁrst set of ideas: 

  

who — business woman —
office worker

 
  
  
    

      
 

age? — youngish?
"arrat" first day at a newjob on way
to work?

 
  
 
 

  

wearing? — smart suit —
no umbrella

ACTIVITY 3.27

Either use your own ideas to create three spider—diagrams or lists, or use the
example above and build on it by adding details for the other two areas (the
shower — where it happens, when, what impact on narrator — and colours and
sounds).

Organising and sequencing
Now you have several options in terms of how to organise your ideas into
paragraphs. You could:

I Organise it chronologically (that is, describe the experience as it happened), for
example Getting oﬁtrain — walking towards oﬁice — sudden rain — trying toﬁnd
shelter — aftermath as rain stops.

Q

\cUnit 3: Imaginative writing

 

I Write it in a more impressionistic manner, paying less attention to the time and
order and more to the experience. You could begin in media res or at the end,
looking back, or simply explore the experience in a less ‘connected’ way. For
example Rain on skin — buildings around me — puddles and images — memories of

 

being a child 
I." 3 28 I Think in terms of the description as a ﬁlmed scene, making the reader see
things through a camera lens (this could be used either with the chronological
 Choose one of these or more impressionistic approach). For example Wide angle — me on a street seen
 approaches and quickly from above; long shot; clouds over the buildings; close up — my face, my cheeks;
i Organise the ideas you close up; ﬁrst spots of rain; medium shot; other passers-by 
generated earlier into ﬁVe I Or any other way you choose to organise your description.

or six sections. (These

might be paragraphs but see Other structural features

below.) Don’t worry if it’s not In an examination situation, you may not have time to spend planning in the sort

Completely precise _ this is of detail suggested here but if you get used to thinking like this, it’s likely to

just a guide for your writing. improve your work. So here are some other features of form and structure to
consider:

I Tense: decide which tense you will mostly use: using the present tense

ACTIVITY 3.29 means you are less likely to slip into telling a story but make sure you use it

consistently.
Spend two or three minutes

looking at the ideas you

have organised into sections.
Decide on the tense, the
person and a draft number
of paragraphs. (If you can
decide which paragraphs

will be short and which long,
so much the better.) Here is a sample plan completed by a student on a similar task about being caught

in a heatwave.

I Narrative voice: the task suggests that the description should be from your
perspective (i.e. the ﬁrst person) but you could consider using the second person
(you) for a diﬁerent type of effect.
I Paragraphs: these do not have to be uniform in length; might there be a beneﬁt 137
in having a very short paragraph after a much longer one? Could you use this
effect for a sudden change in weather or a new description or a change in pace,
mood, etc.?

Tense — present; person - first person (I)

Para 1: short paragraph: wide—angle, sun appearing after rain over the
valley

Para 2: long paragraph: me, working in field picking fruit, the effects
ofthe sun on my neck (close up) and then my arms, body, back and
so on

Lu
U)
2
O
D.
0')
Lu
0:
Lu
.1
n.
2
<
(I)

 

Para 3: long paragraph; the heat’s effect on the earth, flowers, crops; a
bird flying above me; rocky hills nearby

Para 4: short paragraph; my mouth and tongue, parched

Para 5: long paragraph: mirages in the road and valley; flickering; things
blurry

Para 6: sun’s abrupt disappearance behind a mountain peak.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

ACTIVITY 3.30

1 Once you have ﬁnished your plan, share your ideas with a partner.

I Ask them to comment on your plan. Do they have any suggestions to
make the description more Vivid or detailed?

I Are you happy with what you have planned or could it be amended?
Will you be able to write your descriptive piece from this or is more
required?

2 If necessary, redraft your plan, adding new elements or cutting others out.

Writing your draft

If you are working in an exam situation, it is likely that your first draft will be your
only draft, although you will have the opportunity to proof-read and check it.

ACTIVITY 3.31

With your plan or notes beside you, write your response to The Shower task.
Before you do so, glance back over the range of language features and devices
covered in this unit so far (e.g. symbols, allusions to other stories) to remind
yourself of techniques you could use. Try to write about 600 words.

If you prefer to work a different task, use this one:

Write two contrasting descriptive pieces (between 300—450 words each) about
a location immediately before the arrival of a storm and some days after it has
passed. In your writing, create a sense of setting and atmosphere.

Remember that you will still need to plan, even though the task has already
divided the writing into two sections for you. You will need to make the same
decisions about how you generate ideas, plan for paragraphs and select tense,
voice and style of paragraphs.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Highlighting or listing the key words and phrases from the task will keep you
on track.

I Using these key words to generate ideas will provide a solid base for the plan.

I Consider the range of different ways to organise those ideas (e.g.
chronologically).

I Make a conscious decision about the tense, voice and style/length of paragraphs.

Planning and structuring narrative texts
In this section, you will:

I consider how to plan different types of narrative text
I generate ideas about types of narrators you could use.

The planning process for narrative writing is similar to that for descriptive writing,
but a number of other issues must also be considered as structure is particularly
important when telling stories. The different possible narrative voices, the fact that

QACTIVITY 3.32

A student has come up with
the following basic storyline,
which ﬁts the ﬁrst example
(simple chronology). For
each of the other examples in
the table, jot down how the
story might be adapted or
ﬁtted to the narrative form.

In my story, the narrator
is returning home after ten
years away, living under
an assumed name. He

left hisfamily after he lost
hisjob and couldn’t bear
to tell them. Now he has
returned having made his
fortune.

Unit 3: Imaginative writing

the text may be sequenced differently from the actual time order of events, all add

to the potential richness of the text — but also to its challenges.

Different ways of organising narratives

"lhere are many, many different ways of organising a narrative; the ones mentioned
here are perhaps the most obvious you might consider.

Narrative
structure

Straightforward
chronological
account in the first
person, past tense

Dual or multiple
narration

Use of flashback
(with first, third
person, multiple
narration, etc.)

Framed narratives
in which stories
are contained or
revealed through a
different context

Example

It was a Tuesday
morning when I
heard a letter drop
on the mat. Opening
it, I was astounded
to see ...

First para: Narrator
1 opens the letter
which is from his
long-lost father.
Second para: Father
explains why he is
writing.

As he sat on the

bike at the start of
the Tour, it all came
back to him — that
moment when he
was ﬁve and rode his
first bicycle 

e.g a series of
letters found in a
trunk; a woman
explaining events in
a police interview;
a confession to a
priest; an old diary
discovered by a
grandchild.

Possible
advantages,
disadvantages
and effects

Usually clear and
enables the motives
and rationale of
the narratorto be
explained. Can be
predictable, and
possibly dull unless
very wellwritten.

Gives two
perspectives on

the same story, but
could get confusing
and could be boring
if it’s the same story
told twice.

Need to make sure
it isn’t confusing.
More importantly,
there must be a
reason for going
back in time.

Can make the

main voice (in the
framed text) more
convincing and real,
if found by someone
else. Also, can allow
the person who
found orframes

the narrative to
comment on or be
affected by what
he/she reads or
hears.

 

Generating ideas and planning your story

The process for this is very similar to that for other forms of writing. Look again at
pages 136—137 to remind yourself of the process:

Questions]
issues

Can I make the story
more interesting by
making the narrator
unreliable in some
way?

Can I make the two
voices sufficiently
different? Should i
change ‘voice’ each
paragraph, or write
half the account
from one point of
view, then the next
half from the
other?

What is the point
of the flashback?

Is the whole story
to be flashback,
orjust individual
moments? How will
I get back to the
present?

139

Does the framing
have a point? How
will I linkthe framed
story to the original
context?Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

    
 
  
    
  

 

 

TIP

Even if you use the five—stage
structure which is typical

ofmany stories, bear in

mind that ifyou play around
with the time sequence or
narration, the order may need
to change too.

 

 

highlighting or listing the key words or phrases from the task
generating ideas around those key words

organising those ideas into a narrative structure

planning for paragraphs, and, if relevant, dialogue.

One key issue to bear in mind when constructing your narrative, regardless ofwho ,
the narrator is, how many perspectives there are, or whether there is ﬂashback (0r

ﬂash—forward), is the overall arc of a story. We generally talk in terms of a story arc
having four or ﬁve stages:

     
 

 
  

Stage I Example

Introduction/exposition: the character/
setting, etc.

Woman with children going about her
daily life. Very hard as she is on her own.

  
    
   
    
  

  
  

 
  
 
   
 

Complication/problem: something new

Ex-husband, missing for 10 years, turns up.
occurs which changes things '

   
  
    
  
  

Development: life but under new
circumstances, situation changing

He explains what happened, tries to start
again with her, but she is now dating his
brother.

   
  
   

   
  
    
   
  
  

Climax: things come to a head, dramatic
moment when events can go one way or
another.

Showdown with brother. Husband storms
off says he’s going forever, won’t return.

   
  
 

  
   
 
   
  

Conclusion/resolution: events are

completed, but not necessarily happily or
definitively.

Wife follows him to airport. She tells him

she forgives him, but can’t change her life.
He leaves.

 

This, of course, is a very simplistic version of a story structure, and many stories
have more than one problem or complication. In Hollywood terms, these are often
referred to as reversals but these could be small problems, which are overcome
before the bigger ones occur. Thus, the woman in the story above might not be able
to start the car for the school run as it is so old and she is so short of money, so she
takes the children by bus. This is not the main ‘problem’ but it is a symptom.

ACTIVITY 3.33

Take the following title and, using the simple ﬁve—part structure above, jot
down the outline for a story and the main characters in it.

Write a story called The Cheat.

You might want to jot down some ideas before you try to ﬁt them into the
story arc structure.

Unexpected narrators

There is one ﬁnal aspect to consider: who tells the story? In some cases, an
examination task will tell you who the narrator is, but on other occasions, deciding

who tells the story is key. We have already considered the use of multiple narrators,
but what about who those narrators might be?

For example, take this simple story task:

Write a story called Brief Encounter in which a businessperson on the way

homefrom work on the train gets talking to a complete stranger with surprising
consequences.Unit 3: Imaginative writing

 



This work should be seen in the
context ofthe overall planning
and structural help given in the
previous section.

The obvious narrators for this story would be the businessperson or the stranger (or
both) — but who else could tell the story?

ACTIVITY 3.34

1 Working on your own, think of three further possible narrators.
I Which do you think would make the most original storyteller?

I Would there be any particular challenges in choosing this other person
to narrate the story? Would it create any interesting possibilities (such
as misunderstandings)?

2 Draft two versions of the opening paragraphs of the Brief Encounter story.
In the ﬁrst, use a conventional narrator (the businessperson or stranger);
in the second, choose someone more unusual. Which do you prefer?

Further practice

You could write the whole Brief Encounter story using an unusual form of narration
— either a less obvious narrator or multiple narrators.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Use a similar planning structure as for other forms of writing.

I Consider a wide range of possibilities for narrative form and voice.

I Be aware of the challenges associated with selecting particular structures. 141
I Use the ﬁve-stage story arc as a basis for your stories, but use it creatively.

Openings and endings in imaginative texts
In this section, you will:

I explore a variety of openings and endings
I consider their effects

I try them out in your own writing.

Openings and endings do not exist as separate entities within imaginative texts but
focusing on them can help identify what it is that makes readers want to read on, and
make readers feel that they have had a fulﬁlling experience by the end. In this section
you will encounter a range of different types of openings and endings for imaginative
texts along with some elements which can be used to draw texts together.

Different types of openings to stories

What makes a good opening to a story? Story openings are so diverse that it is
difﬁcult to identify common features. However, any opening must engage the
reader. How this is done varies hugely, but it could be by:

I creating a particular atmosphere or tone which ﬁts with the sort of a story we
want to read (e.g. a gothic mystery). For example The candle—light from the old
cottageﬂickered against the window pane as he brushed the branches aside; She
could see that the surface 0fthe planet was pockmarked with tiny silverpools as
she steppedfrom the landing craft.

I offering something funny, surprising, surreal or shocking. For example: It
was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen // I write this
sitting in the kitchen sink.

@

l