Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

The social interactions between the guests are naturally varied, light—
hearted and often noisy. Because many people will not know each other, formal

introductions will take place and some of the conversations will reference the 
nature of the relationship of the guests to the bride and groom, with many stories I
Now choose an important and anecdotes about them. ‘
celebration where you live After the wedding the bride and groom will send thank—you cards to those from
and list, with explanations, whom they have received gifts.
the variety of language styles Of course, each Wedding ceremony is different but the established rituals and 1
used. legal requirements clearly show the differences of language according to the context I,

of the different elements of the occasion.

ACTIVITY 5.5

Read the following extract about Indian ﬁlm star Shahrukh Khan, which
includes some fan postings. Use this as a starting point to discuss the diﬁerent

language styles which exist around a celebrity. Consider their fans and the I f
critics of their work.

 

 

Shahrukh Khan is a highly acclaimed award—winning — Best of luck Shah Rukth Love u soooo much... Hope
Indian ﬁlm actor who works in Bollywood ﬁlms, thisﬁlm will he a hlockhluster like your other ﬁlms.
as well as a ﬁlm producer and television host. Khan Love u soooo much.

began his career appearing in several television serials
in the late 19803. He made his ﬁlm debut with the
commercially successful Deewana (1992). Since then,
he has been part of numerous commercial successes — big fan of uuu .... ..i like your movies..myfavrite is darr
and has delivered a variety of critically acclaimed and bazigar dewana

performances. During his years in the Indian ﬁlm
industry, he has won thirteen Filmfare Awards, seven
of which are in the Best Actor category. While some
of Khan’s best-known ﬁlms: Dilwale Dulhaniya Le
fayenge (1995), Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (1998), Chak De
India (2007) and Om Shanti 0m (2007), remain some
of Bollywood’s biggest hits, ﬁlms like Kabhi Khushi
Kabhie Gham (2001), KalHo Naa Ho (2003), Veer-
Zaara (2004) and KahhiAlvida Naa Kehna (2006)
have been top-grossing productions in the overseas
market, making Khan one of the most successful
actors of Hindi cinema.

The following are comments from Shahrukh
Khan’s fans:

— Hope andprays that Happy New Year Film will he a 177
blockbluster IN india and Overseas like ur other ﬁlms

entertainment.oneindia.in

— HIiii SRK i’m ur higfan....i like ur dressing, attitude,
communisations, and ur voice .....these are amazing
...Ilike u ....hest ofluckfor ur newﬁlm “Raees”....I
hope that New One record becomes with this ﬁlm...
Take Care

— No matters whatever he does, The main thing is - SRK
Did.. Yhats Enough For MeCambridge International A Level English Language

 

, ACTIVITY 5.6

For practice with essay writing, attempt one or both of the following
suggested titles.

1 With close reference to speciﬁc case studies, explain in what ways featureS 7

of spoken language can be inﬂuenced by context.
2 With close reference to speciﬁc case studies and your wider knowledge of

to the following extract from the British Library website:

Language also changes very subtly whenever speakers come into contact
with each other. No two individuals speak identically: people ﬁ'om diﬁerent
geographical places clearly speak diﬂerently, but even within the same
small community there are variations according to a speaker’s age, gender,
ethnicity and social and educational background. Through our interactions
with these diﬁ‘erentspeakers, we encounter new words, expressions and
pronunciations and integrate them into our own speech.

www.bl.uk

Language used to include and exclude

Inclusion and exclusion are very broad terms for the functioning of many groups
in society where national, regional, and local neighbourhood groups continue to
change. He language of inclusion and exclusion is frequently accompanied by

I 78 . . . . . . .
the more socrological concepts relating to ethn1c1ty and the politics of a country.
"lhese factors may be very signiﬁcant in the area where you live and language here
becomes one of a number of informal signiﬁers of the opportunities which are
given or denied to particular groups in society.

TIP

I This section covers a broad overview of economic, social and historical
ideas linked to language. Make sure you understand these ideas and have
appropriate case studies and examples to use when discussing them.

In an exam, you may be given stimulus material which tests your general
understanding as it applies to the exam question. You will be expected to

appraise and justify your view using both the exam question and your own
resources.

I Discussion and evaluating points with evidence are important skills to practise.

6 ii 3 FURTHER RESEARCH

  

Is he one of us? Ibis question was famously asked by Margaret Thatcher, former
prime minister of the UK, about any new arrival on the political scene. Jamaican
immigrants arriving in Britain in the 1950s often found that their style of
spoken English was not readily understood by British people. The difference in
spoken English often reinforced differences between the immigrant and resident

communities. Studies of young male gang members in New York showed that

although they spoke ﬂuently amongst their peers, they often failed at school where
a different style of English was spoken.

In this section you will explore situations where language contributes to the
inclusion or exclusion of individuals or certain groups in society.

\_‘

~ 5
E

ways in which language varies according to context, discuss your responseWilliam the Conqueror.

 

For more on the impact of
colonisation on language, see
the section on Language death
in Unit 6 on page 254.

 

 

   

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

Examples of national and international exclusion

Group inclusion and exclusion has almost always been linked to power wielded

by a dominant group. Nations have conquered, invaded, and colonised others and
the incoming group often enforces their lan

provides many examples of ethnic exclusio
many have a direct link to language.

Read through these case studies after which there will be activities and further
research. Remember, the case studies are only very brief accounts of complex events.

guage on the weaker group. History
n and these are still common today;

England

When William the Conqueror invaded England in 1066, Norman French became

the ofﬁcial language, replacing the language spoken by the defeated Anglo Saxons_
For two hundred years, French was the language of the aristocracy and the powerful
in England, while the peasants continued with Old English. However, the two

languages gradually merged into important components of present-day English,

South America

Under colonial rule, Spanish replaced Quechua and other Amerindian languages
in much of South America after conquest by Spain, while Portuguese became

the ofﬁcial language of Brazil. While the Indian languages are still spoken today,
Spanish and Portuguese are the main languages throughout the continent.

New Zealand

Colonisation wiped out many languages. British colonisation of the Indian sub—
continent, parts of South—East Asia, North America and Australasia led to the
imposition of English onto the newly colonised populations. Where the minority
languages survived, such as Maori in New Zealand, ofﬁcial attitudes and policy
discouraged its use, and children were forbidden from speaking it in schools. Maori
was seen as irrelevant to economic advancement, with the view that English needed
to replace it. Subsequent concern from all groups in New Zealand has reversed this
policy and Maori is now one of the ofﬁcial languages of New Zealand. A policy of
encouragement and inclusion has transformed what had become a minority native
language into a mainstream component of the nation’s culture.

North America

Forced transport of groups such as the slave trade between Africa and the United
States had a huge impact on language. Africans who were transported to work as
slaves on the plantations of the Southern United States spoke a variety of languages
and were totally excluded from any rights in their new environment. The slave owners
feared rebellion and adopted a policy of mixing different language groups in the same
working area. The impact of this deprivation was the emergence of a functional mix
of vocabulary and syntax, known as pidgin. In time, this basic language developed
more complex grammatical structures to form a fully functioning creole language.
The partial fusion and adaptation of the many languages of New Guinea are a

particularly good example of the language process of pidgin and creolisation.

   

TIP

Writing down the conclusions from your discussions, including discussions of case

studies, will provide points of view and relevant material for this topic for future
essays and coursework.

    
    

179Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

 

ACTIVITY 5.7

1 Discuss in a group why language is so important to the power and control
of a country. Think about the motives of those who are in control and
the attitudes of those who are denied the freedom to speak their natiVe
language.

2 Choose one of the case studies given in this section and carry out some
individual or group research on the current situation with regard to the
language which was used to exclude sections of the population. What
brought about the changes?

3 Discuss the view that it is easier to run a country when all the population
speaks the same language and that the use of a different language by
certain groups may be divisive.

4 Find out about any instances where language has been used to exclude
certain groups in your own part of the world and the responses to this
situation.

5 The use of language to exclude is closely linked to the notion of social
exclusion — where communities are blocked from opportunities and
beneﬁts available to other groups, for example, civil rights, housing and
education. Investigate a speciﬁc case study of language exclusion and
assess the extent to which language and social exclusion are linked.

a Language and religion

The violence of the actions taken to exclude some controlling groups, and the
signiﬁcance played by language in this process, should not be underestimated.
Religious groups have often experienced this extreme control. For example, the
Roman Catholic Church ﬁercely opposed the ﬁrst translations of the Bible into
English from Latin, which appeared in England in the 1300s. Many people were
burned as heretics because of their wish to worship in English. The language elected
by a group for their religious worship literally became a matter of life and death.

South Africa

Under the South African Apartheid regime, the controlling white government
proposed that Black children should be taught in Afrikaans, one of the native
languages. This was unpopular and sparked riots in 1976 as these groups saw
education in English as an advantage which was being denied to them.

Language and negative stereotypes

As well as being a factor in direct exclusion as described above, language is an integral
part of stereotyping. You may know that a stereotype is a broad generalisation about
one group by another, and the judgements and labels associated with stereotyping
are frequently negative. In Nazi Germany negative stereotyping of Jewish people was
reinforced by ofﬁcial policy, with atrocious consequences.

In South Africa during the era of apartheid, and in the United States before Civil
Rights reform, negative stereotyping in society resulted in huge racial inequalities.

The language of the American Civil Rights movement

The power of language to include those suffering exclusion is well exempliﬁed in the
19605 United States Civil Rights movement. Although this was a protracted struggle,

0Research Martin Luther King
and his speeches, then analyse:
the style he adopted; his use of
:lietorical techniques; and the
language methods he used to
persuade his listeners otthe
iustice othis cause.

A mural in Soweto depicting Nelson
Mandela at the time of his trial.

Africans want to be paid a living wage. Africans want
to perform work which they are capable of doing,

and not work which the government declares them

to be capable of. We want to be allowed to live Where
we obtain work,and not be endorsed out of an area
because we were not born there. We want to be
allowed to own land in places where we work, and not
to be obliged to live in rented houses which we can
never call our own. Africans want to be part of the
general population, and not conﬁned to living in our
ghettoes. African men want to have their Wives and
children to live with them where they work, and not
be forced into an unnatural existence in men’s hostels.
Our women want to be with their menfolk and not be
left permanently widowed in the reserves. We want

to be allowed out after eleven o’clock at night and not
to be conﬁned to their rooms like little children. We

Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

rights leaders such as Martin Luther King.

From 1963 to 1964 Nelson Mandela and several other ANC leaders were on trial
at Pretoria’s Supreme Court (known as the
life sentences). Below is a short extract from Mandela’s statement on 20th April
1964, made at the opening of the case for the defence.

 

want to be allowed to travel in our own country and to
seek work where we want to and not where the Labour
Bureau tells us to. We want a just share in the whole of
South Africa; we want security and a stake in society.
Above all, My Lord, we want equal political
rights, because without them our disabilities will
be permanent. I know this sounds revolutionary to
the whites in this country, because the majority of
voters will be Africans. This makes the white man fear
democracy.
But this fear cannot be allowed to stand in the
way of the only solution which will guarantee racial
harmony and freedom for all. It is not true that the
enfranchisement of all will result in racial domination.
Political division, based on colour, is entirely artiﬁcial
and, when it disappears, so will the domination of
one colour group by another. The ANC has spent

/

\

Rivonia Trial; they would later receive

181Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

half a century ﬁghting against racialism. When it white domination, and I have fought against black
triumphs as certainly it must, it will not change that domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic
policy. This then is What the ANC is ﬁghting for. Our and free society in which all persons live together in
struggle is a truly national one. It is a struggle of the harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal
African people, inspired by our own suffering and our which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be,
own experience. It is a struggle for the right to live. My Lord, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.

During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this
struggle of the African people. I have fought against

ACTIVITY 5.8

1 Read the text of Nelson Mandela’s speech carefully and analyse the
language used. How does the language include the black population of
South Africa as equal citizens?

From No easy walk to freedom by Nelson Mandela.

Consider the following:
I the methods Mandela uses to include all racial groups

I the effects of imagery and rhetorical techniques to emphasise the
importance and urgency of the need for racial equality within South
Africa.

2 Find a Video clip of Nelson Mandela giving this or another speech.
How does his delivery affect the impact? Imagine you were a listener
in the crowd while Mandela was speaking; what would your reaction
have been?

a“ run R‘REMSEARCH

 

Language groups and social class

Some social groups have formal admission procedures such as subscriptions, or
through academic or professional qualiﬁcation. Other groups do not; membership
is informal and may be selectively adopted as part of a lifestyle such as membership
of a running or ﬁtness club.

There are very few groups where speciﬁc consideration of the language
of a member would be a formal condition of entry, perhaps a group such as
Toastmasters — an international public-speaking group. As you learned in the
previous section, communication accommodation theory suggests that when
people wish to share interests, however loosely, their speech patterns tend to
converge — that is, they become more alike. The other side of this is that those
groups who speak differently may suffer exclusion. Studies have shown that
immigrants whose command of English may be limited may suffer discrimination,
which results in more limited educational and career prospects.

Not speaking English may mean being trapped in a low—paying job with no
obvious means of advancement. A New York Times report of 2006 suggested (and
a New Zealand Government paper has made similar assertions) that there is a
penalty in being from a non-English speaking background which also relates to
ethnicity.

The attitude of many in the USA towards the varied non-English speaking
populations is an interesting one because an important attitude in the growth and
settlement of the ‘melting pot’ of the United States was the Latin motto e pluribus
unum (‘one out of many’) and this included the speaking of English. Today thereUnit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

 

For more about RP (Received
Pronunciation) turn to page 231
in Unit 6.

are large areas where many languages other than English are spoken and there
is much debate about the possible exclusion from opportunities for those non—
English-speaking groups.

The language of class in Britain - a case study of exclusion and inclusion

Many societies, probably including yours, have different forms of social
stratiﬁcation. The example of the British class system will be discussed here, as it
demonstrates well both group inclusion and exclusion through language.

In Britain, informal judgements and media commentary Often generate an
understanding of who belongs to which class. Historically, the social classes were
deﬁned as the upper class, the middle class and the working class — other groupings
are more directly related to employment.

Social class is a subject much discussed in British society: what deﬁnes the
classes; who belongs to which class; how you move upwards through the class
system; and, for an increasing number of people, whether the social classes actually
still exist.

What is social class?

The word class is derived from the Latin classis which was used in
the Roman Empire as a measurement of wealth; this meaning still
underpins the concept of class. Apart from wealth, class refers to
how you display yourwealth in your lifestyle both in material and
non-material ways. Traditional British values assume a member of
the upper class to have a large income, a big house in a desirable
area, to spend liberally on expensive consumer goods and also to
speak with an RP (Received Pronunciation) accent. In addition, and
this is less easy to define, the upper classes are thought to possess a
confident approach to life derived from the best of British education
and family background.

This View is arguably long outdated as industrial economic prosperity generated
an inﬂuential British middle class in the 19th and 20th centuries. The welfare
state with universal health and education provision also helped to blur the earlier
sharp divisions. Later on, with the new digital revolution, new technological skills
produced a new class of aﬂ‘luent people that cut across traditional class lines.
Although Britain in the 21st century is certainly not without social inequalities,
the divisions are no longer as clear. However, social anthropologist Kate Fox
asserts that class pervades all aspects of English life and culture and emphasises
the subtle boundaries within people’s lives which classify them within the
hierarchy.

ACTIVITY 5.9

Read the following account.

In the late 19605 a large engineering company, famous for making bicycles,
needed to employ more factory workers. Their advertisement read Hands
wanted. The same company provided food for its workforce: the factory
workers ate their midday meal (their dinner) in the canteen, while the middle

183Cambridge lnternationalA Level English Language

0 8 3 FURTHER RESEARCH

6&8 FURTHE RESEARCH

 

 

 

managers ate lunch, and the senior managers ate luncheon, in diﬁerent

restaurants. Female managers (there were very few) ate in the senior ladies
restaurant.

1 Organise the following list of employees into their appropriate midday
meal arrangements, as they would have been in the 19603.

I human resources manager (female)
I bicycle assembly worker

I director of factory production

I bicycle assembly manager

I children’s cycle design manager

I cycle factory cleaner

I training oﬂicer (female)

I training director

I managing director’s secretary (female)
Give reasons for your answers.

2 What links are there between the language of the restaurants and the
different classes of workers in the factory?

Language and group identity

Research has shown that individuals accommodate to each other by adopting
similar speech patterns for inclusion in the group they wish to be part of, such as
a social class. Linguist Howard Giles developed this theory of convergence, which

is an important feature of group identity. Conversely an individual may diverge

to accentuate differences in speech. TV comedy has often used convergence and
divergence to help satirise the class system.

ACTIVITY 5.10

Research a TV or radio comedy show that is concerned with social class —
you may ﬁnd it easier to use a British show, as social class is often present.

Consider how standard and non—standard language, and any regional accents
and dialects, are used to show differences in social class.

Discuss the extent to which the language used inﬂuenced the comedy
situations that emerged, and try to analyse how these were created.

Note: You may ﬁnd that some older comedy shows have content that
would be considered racist, sexist or politically incorrect today.

Research studies on language and social class

It will be clear to you from the preceding information that many assertions have
been made about social class without being backed up by relevant research.

Indeed, it is the case that comments and stereotypes about social class are regularly
made without systematic back up from reliable research. It is an area full of
unsubstantiated claims because many people feel that they know instinctively to
which groups they and others belong. However, there have been signiﬁcant studiesUnit 5: Spoken language and social groups

William Labov

Labov (1966) researched the use of the post-vocalic /r/ in New York City. This is
where the /r/ is actually pronounced, often at the end of a word such as car, far.
This type of pronunciation is much more widely used in North American/Scottish
English than British English which weakens the sound to pronounce these words
as /Ca/ 0r /fa/. The weak pronunciation of the ﬁnal syllable in this pronunciation of
English is a schwa where the sound is unstressed.

The postvocalic /r/ in the United States has a prestige similar to the
pronunciation of the /h/ at the beginning of a word in British English (i.e. it
is considered ‘lower class’ in Britain to pronounce /house as /’0use and happy/
as ’appy). Labov theorised that as the sound connoted prestige, people would
pronounce it and his predictions were largely conﬁrmed in unscripted speech.

Peter Trudgill

Trudgill (1973, revisited 1988) investigated a similar language and social class link
but with the dialect features of omitting the third person singular inﬂection (e.g.
she sleep a lot; he do cause trouble) and found that this construction was a feature of
some British working-class speakers (e.g. in the Norfolk region).

Advertising

You have learned that that group membership can both be imposed from outside,
such as a professional association, and can also be more complex such as social
class. Group membership can sometimes be unclearly deﬁned.

One signiﬁcant group that we are all allocated to in an increasingly
sophisticated way is that of consumers. The language of advertising targets our
psychological needs to ensure that we include ourselves in speciﬁc categories and
buy items which are appropriate for the group to which we feel we belong.

ACTIVITY 5.11

1 You may already be familiar with the following examples of the language
of advertising from earlier work. If you are, then remind yourself of their
meaning by writing a short deﬁnition of each. If not, then carry out some
research to ﬁnd out their meaning.

loaded language
appeals to basic needs
bandwagon
testimonial

snob appeal

connotation

2 Discuss some of the ideas about the language of inclusion and exclusion
presented in this section. Investigate a group you are interested in and
focus on the use of language associated with that group.

3 Much of the information in this section relates to social class in
Britain. Select another country or region and assess its system of social
stratiﬁcation. To what extent do you think that language plays a part in
maintaining the hierarchy?

4 Write an extended piece suitable for inclusion in the editorial section
of a quality newspaper where you discuss, with evidence, the part that
language plays in group identity.

185

 

“1%.... __.____.._1Cambridge lnternationalA Level English Language

 

 

The language ofteenagers is
explored further in the section
on Language acquisition in

Unit 7 and this section relates
closely to that. However, this
section focuses specifically on
this age group in relation to their
interaction with otherteenagers
and with othergroups in which
inclusion and exclusion can
occur

The language of teenage groups

What would your life be like without your phone? Teenagers are early adopters of
technology and use it extensively. They effortlessly tweet, text and communicate
through a variety of media. A sample taken of two English classes showed that,
although all students used their phones almost all the time, a clear majority did not
use text language in any other medium. They gave their English teacher a test on
words used commonly in ‘text speak’ and the teacher knew hardly any of them! so
text speak can act in the same way as jargon, to exclude those who are not familiar
with the abbreviations and emoticons.

 

 

As teenagers are arguably the group who use electronically mediated
communication more than any other, concerns are being raised at the extent to
which the increasing use of text language is making an impact on Standard English
constructions. This is nothing new: generations of older people have complained
about a decline in standards of language amongst young people. In 1908, Thomas
Lounsbury, a professor of language and literature at Yale University, observed that
there has existed in every period ofthe past, as there is now, a distinct apprehension
in the minds ofvery many worthy persons that the English tongue is always in the
condition ofapproaching collapse.

However, with the dramatic increase in electronically mediated communication,
perhaps this generation of complainers has a good point. The areas of concern
about declining language standards among teenage groups focus on the extensive
use of electronically mediated information such as texting and the language of
emails and tweets.

Recent research by Naomi S. Baron highlights areas of concerns on the
increasing use of abbreviations and emoticons combined with a reduction in the
use of standard punctuation and capital letters. Media articles have expressed
unease about the increasing reliance on this form of communication. Concerns
about how electronic communication will affect the English language include:

I the extent to which these new forms intrude on the traditional areas of writing
and speech. For example, is the use of brh and 101 in speech as well as in a text
signiﬁcantly different from the use of acronyms such as RSVP and SOS which
are considered as standard use?

I whether the lack of spaces in web addresses will tip over into general use. This

would be an interesting return to medieval language where there were no spaces
in the writings of monks in monasteries.

0Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

I worries about a lack of standardised spellings and of prescriptive direction as to
whether one form of language expression is ‘right’

I whether certain groups who do not regularly write or speak in this way will be
excluded.

ACTIVITY 5.12

Devise and conduct a questionnaire on text language. Try to get a range of
ages amongst your respondents as an interesting variable.

I Ask your respondents whether they think the use of text language is ever
appropriate outside texting. If so, in what situations?

I Compile a list of the text abbreviations you use regularly and ask your
respondents how many of these they are familiar with. Is age the only
reason for a lack of knowledge of this type of language?

I Use the results of your research to write a reasoned blog for an education
website on The role of text language in teenage lives.

Language in cyberspace
One of the problems associated with the internet is the issue of cyber—bullying,
which is deﬁned as a young person tormenting, threatening, harassing, or
embarrassing another young person using the internet or other technologies,
such as cell phones. This behaviour is now possible because of the internet and the
anonymity it provides through the bullies being able to block information. Face—
to—face bullying has been in existence wherever inequalities of power or status exist
and language is one of the strongest weapons available to the bully.

It is not just text speak which deﬁnes teenage groups. Teenagers are able to
code switch according to their audience, but still present a casual colloquial face to
society in general. '

ACTIVITY 5.13

Read the article below in which Oscar—Winning actress Emma Thompson
reﬂects on the language of teenagers and the impact she feels it has.

1 Discuss how far you agree with her view that the language people use
inﬂuences other people’s opinions of them.

2 This article gives one clear example of broadly based social groups, in
this case teenage girls, using language for group identity in particular
circumstances. Discuss whether you feel this type of language has uses for
teenage social groups.

That Emma Thompson’s, like, well annoyed, innit

The Oxford-educated actress has
hit out at slang used by the young,
claiming it makes them sound stupid
when they’re not. The 51—year-old,
known for her roles in Shakespeare

ﬁlm adaptations, said the use of
sloppy language made her feel
“insane”.

“I went to give a talk at my old
school and the girls were all doing

 .rswmwvmﬁmw,.,,W.,._wmww. .w .w

187Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

their ‘likes’ and ‘innits?’ and ‘it ain’ts’,  not stupid. There is the necessity to
which drives me insane,” she told the  have two languages — one that you use
Radio Times.  with your mates and the other that you

“I told them ‘Just don’t do it. Because  need in any ofﬁcial capacity.”
it makes you sound stupid and you’re '

WPWW. memWﬁpww, "wwpmvaﬂrmm. ,

 

www.mirror.co.uk

Online social groups—case study of fansites

The origin ofﬁm is an abbreviation of the word fanatic, which has a very different
connotation from the fan as an enthusiastic follower but which does allude to

the excesses of some fans’ behaviour. The media world of TV and ﬁlm has always
generated fans, from the earliest days of Hollywood where they were initially
depicted as hysterical screaming girls. Now though, a fan can be anybody and it
can be quite a serious endeavour. Fan clubs and fan magazines have existed for a
long time, but the internet has enabled global communities to ﬂourish. Almost all
stars and ﬁlms have some sort of following but it is international sport coverage
and large ﬁlm and TV franchises which have resulted in the largest number of fans
forming online groups with communities of interest.

188

Real Madrid before a Champions’
League match in 2012.

  

Examples ofonline fan communities are varied and represent many interests.
Follow the links to some examples of fan sites:

Fan site forthe famous and recently retired Indian cricketer Sachin Tendulkar:
http://www.sachintendulkar.in/2008/09/sachin-tendulkars-gallery.html

The French fan site forthe Lebanese—British singer—songwriter Mika:
http://www.mikafanclub.com/

The Spanish football club Real Madrid’s fansite: www.realmadrid.com/en

Fan communities oprple computers: http://applefansite.com/

All fan groups have common characteristics. They provide a forum for the sharing
of interests and ideas where detailed knowledge gives status to group members.
Fans of TV shows and book series, for example, not only know the twists and turns
of the stories but may also have extensive background knowledge. Fan sites allow

(\

xx