Unit 6: English as a global language

 

ACTIVITY 6.12

“lhe Queen’s English’ is a particularly advanced form of English
pronunciation which, like all language, has changed over time. Search online
for both early and recent recordings of Queen Elizabeth H. How is her
pronunciation different from that of other RP speakers? How has her own
pronunciation changed during her lifetime?

Read the following extract carefully. It is from the novel The Adventures of
Huckleberry Firm by the American writer Mark Twain and was published in 1884.
It is the story of a young boy and his struggles to ﬁt into society. The novel contains
much non-Standard English. Look particularly at the following:

I vocabulary
I syntax (the way the sentences are put together).

I see Jim before me, all the time; in the day, and in the And at last I struck the time I saved him by telling the

night—time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, men we had small—pox aboard, and he was so grateful,

and we a-ﬂoating along, talking, and singing, and and said I was the best friend old Jim ever had in

laughing. But somehow I couldn’t seem to strike no the world, and the only one he’s got now; and then I I ,
places to harden me against him, but only the other happened to look around, and see that paper. }
kind. I’d see him standing my watch on top of his’n, It was a close place. I took it up, and held it in my

’stead of calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see hand. Iwas a—trembling, because I’d got to decide, 231
him how glad he was when I come back out of the fog; forever, betwixt two things, and I knowed it. I studied

and when I come to him again in the swamp, up there a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then says to

where the feud was; and such-like times; and would myself:

always call me honey, and pet me, and do everything ‘All right, then, I’ll go to hell’ — and tore it up.

he COUld thmk 0f for me’ and how good he always was' From The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain.

ACTIVITY 6.13

1 What are the main differences between the language used in this extract and
Standard English? Why do you think the novel was written in this way?

2 Standard English and RP are usually the dominant forms taught to non-
native speakers. What do you consider to be the main reasons for teaching
this variety of English over any other?

People using Standard English dialect and an RP accent are likely to be perceived
as educated, professional and possibly in some position of authority and trust.
However, responses to this style of English, both in Britain and elsewhere, vary
from admiration to ridicule. In the recent past, some high—proﬁle people who once
spoke with a regional British accent — such as Margaret Thatcher, a famous British
Prime Minister — have changed to using Standard English. Others, who perceive
this style of speech to be élitist — including another recent British Prime Minister,
Tony Blair — have consciously adopted styles of speech perceived to be more ‘of
the people’.Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

 

RP is perceived as an accent spoken by those in authority so people who deliver
news bulletins often use it, because they are likely to be trusted and what they are
saying is assumed to be true. During the Second World War, a popular British radio
presenter, Wilfred Pickles, occasionally broadcast the news. This was the ﬁrst time that
anyone who spoke with a regional accent had broadcast serious news material rather
than light-entertainment programmes and it was considered quite revolutionary.

The poem extract which follows is on the same subject of accents and trust, and
satirises people who do not want to hear serious news items from people speaking
LOOk baCk at Page 215 in unit 5 with a regional accent. The poem is written in eye-dialect which replicates the
for more abOUt eye dialeCt‘ sound of someone speaking with a Glaswegian accent. (Glasgow is a large city in

Scotland where the accent is perceived to be very broad.) If

 

From ‘Unrelated incidents — No.3’ by

Tom Leonard.

this is thi canny cannot
six 3 Clock six a’clock news six o’clock — a traditional time for a UK national news ;
bulletin 
news thi scruff(s) uneducated person/people '
man said n thirza there’s a
thi reason tOk talk
widny would not
a talk wia
BBC accent
Widny wahnt 1 Explain what point the poet is making about the use of Received
mi ti talk Pronunciation to communicate important matters in British English. To
. what extent do you agree with the poet? How do people today respond
abOOt thl differently to accents which are used in media broadcasts in your region?
trooth wia Suggest reasons for your answer.
voice lik Discuss the View that Received Pronunciation is the most suitable English
accent to use for nationwide communication in the media.
wanna yoo There are many debates about speaking the Standard English dialect with
scruff. if a Received Pronunciation accent. What perceptions would you have about
someone who used RP?
a t0ktab00t Do you trust the RP accent over others? There are now many other forms
thi trooth of English, some of which you will learn about in this course. Are these as
well regarded as Standard English? Give reasons for your answer.
lik wanna yoo
scruff yi
widny thingk 3*“ FURTHER RESEARCH
it wuz troo.Unit 6: English as a global language

New forms of non-standard English

New forms of non-standard English are constantly evolving. Estuary English (EE)
is quickly spreading in the UK from its origins along the Thames Estuary outwards
from London. There is general agreement that it is being adopted by many,
including TV and ﬁlm personalities who would previously have spoken RP. There
is some debate about whether the current pronunciation of RP will die out — it will
certainly change!

The word Mockney is a word combining mock (in the sense of fake or unreal)
with Cockney. It is a ‘portmanteau’ word — one which combines two words to
describe something. Cockney is the traditional accent of working-class people in
the East End of London and Mockney is sometimes used inaccurately in the media
to describe Estuary English. But it is distinct from EE, referring to a deliberate and
often temporary accent. It originated in the 19903 and describes middle class people
who usually speak with an RP accent altering the way they speak to sound ‘more
Cockney’. This is an interesting change where people perceive the non—standard
accent to be more up—to-date than the traditionally ‘correct’ RP.

The rise of Estuary English

The past 25 years has seen the rise of a' style of speech with an accent known as
Estuary English. It has spread far beyond its original location on the Thames
Estuary and is now sufﬁciently widespread to raise important issues about the
changes to different varieties of British English because it is spoken by people from
such a wide cross-section of society. A dictionary of phonetics and phonology
describes EE as an accent falling somewhere between broad Cockney at one extreme
and unmistakable RP (received pronunciation) at the other.

In the Cambridge Encyclopaedia of the English Language (Cambridge
University Press, 2005), David Crystal comments:

233

There’s a phenomenon which seems to be spreading throughout Britain‘which is
called ‘I vocalisation’ and that’s where the ‘1’ sound gets replaced with something
that’s more like a vowel.

The glottal stop is used where the vocal cords are momentarily closed to stop the air
flow and no sound is made. A very recognisable result is the non-pronunciation of
the ‘t’so that party becomes ‘par’y.’

Estuary English may therefore be the result of a conﬂuence of two social trends:

an up-market movement of originally Cockney speakers, and a down-market
trend towards ‘ordinary’ (as opposed to ‘posh’) speech by the middle class. There
is certainly plenty of anecdotal evidence that many people these days wish to avoid
the ‘establishment’ connotations of Received Pronunciation, and try to speak in a
way which they perceive to be more down-to—earth.

0" 0 I9 FURTHER RESEARCHCambridge InternationalA Level English Language

 

 

For more on Standard English
and the English ofsocial groups,
turn to pages 192, 200 and
229—231.

Changes to Standard English and Received Pronunciation

It is important to remember that there is nothing speciﬁc about Received
Pronunciation which makes it superior to other accents; it is only the attitudes
of English speakers which linked this way of speaking with power and inﬂuence
in society. However, since the 1960s, there has been a much greater acceptance
of regional accents. They are now heard widely in the media in Britain so that in
some circumstances Received Pronunciation is seen as old—fashioned and rather
pompous.

The British newspaper, The Guardian, reported as far back as 1994, that the cut-
glass [very upper class] accent ofhorne counties Britain is to be banishedfrom the air
waves by the BBC infavour ofmore energetic and vigorous voicesfrom the regions

However, as regional accents have become more acceptable, there has actually
been a decline in these distinctive forms of speech. People travel widely and no
longer spend their lives in the same area, as was the case in previous generations.
Certainly the accents of English will continue to change and develop and the vast
numbers of non—native speakers of English will contribute to this process.

ACTIVITY 6.15

1 Using examples from speciﬁc regions, discuss the idea that it is important
to teach native English speakers and non-native English students the
standard form of English.

2 Using examples from speciﬁc regions show in what ways non—standard
forms of English differ from Standard English.

3 Discuss, with speciﬁc examples, the idea that any English speaker who
uses non-standard forms of English may be socially disadvantaged.

English: standard and non-standard

Here are some summary points to reinforce the most important issues

surrounding Standard and Non—Standard English.

I Although Standard English is widely known, it is spoken by a only a minority of
English speakers both in Britain and worldwide.

I Many other dialects of English are spoken.

I Language changes through time and with the changes come differences in
attitudes towards what is acceptable usage.

I Different registers or levels of formality are regularly used in English according
to the situations the speakers are in. Most speakers are able to unconsciously
adjust their register of language according to the linguistic demands ofthe
situation; this is known as code switching.

I Slang is a rapidly changing feature of non—standard English.

I The position of English as a global language means that many global varieties of
English are emerging.

I Is there a ‘right’ form of English or are all varieties equally important? Whose
view counts?ACTIVITY 6.16

Find out more about the
local variety of non-standard
English spoken where you
live. Look for examples

of the language used and
comment on the attitudes
towards its usage in your
area and in the wider

‘ English-speaking world

TIP

You need to have a good
understanding ofthe
historical and social factors
which have contributed to
the development ofdifferent
varieties of English. It will be
helpful to know two or three

case studies in detail.

Use the examples which
follow as a pattern for your
own research. You will then
have a range of information
and examples about the ways
in which different varieties of
English developed.

 

Look back at page 228 to remind
yourself of Kachru’s Circles
model.

Unit 6: English as a global language

In this section you will be exploring current attitudes and values related to non—
standard varieties of English, but it can be interesting to ﬁnd out some past views
on these issues too. Linguist David Crystal asserts that in earlier English language
study, dialects of English have been consciously neglected. He references an English
language textbook published in the 20th century (H. C. Wilde’s A Short History

of English) which informed its readers that English dialects were of very little
importance and even called them quaint and eccentric — in other words they were
not worth bothering with even as a language study. This has completely changed in
recent years but the belief that one form of English was superior led to the notion of
non-Standard English as we shall see in this section.

It follows that if Standard English was seen as the prestige form, that non—
standard dialects were considered to be inferior and deﬁcient in some way. This
attitude underpins earlier linguistic beliefs that there is only one correct form and
all the others are less worthy. In Britain, when the BBC (the British Broadcasting
Company, now Corporation) was formed under Lord Reith he speciﬁcally
instructed that that the English style spoken on BBC radio and television was to be
Standard English. This form of ‘BBC English’ has been widely parodied for being so
artiﬁcial that it can seem comical.

Varieties of English

We will now move on to consider varieties of English spoken throughout the world.
You should be able to recognise the areas where the following are spoken: Iaplish,
Russlish, Spanglish, Deutschlish. These and other forms are offshoots of English
where the standard form of the language has merged with elements of the local
language to give a new form; so Deutschlish for example is a mix of English and
German vocabulary and syntax. There is some debate as to whether these varieties

can be considered a new language or an evolving dialect of English.

Because English is learned around the world, it is spoken in a variety of ways.
People in different regions of the world are creating new varieties of English which
are distinctive and of equal value to British English. There are hundreds of these
varieties of non-standard English.

In this section you will consider three examples of these:

I Singapore English
I South African English
I Australian English.

Singapore English (‘Singlish’)

‘Singlish’ is the variety of English spoken in Singapore, which is included in the
Outer Circle of Kachru’s Circles of English. British rule in this geographically small
but economically inﬂuential island was established in 1819 by Stamford Raffles

on behalf of the British East India Company. The English language has been used
in government and many other areas of life since British colonial rule began in
1824. Singapore and Malaysia are more than 10,000 kms from Britain and include
many ethnic groups principally Malays, Chinese and Indians. It is therefore not
surprising that the form of English spoken in this region changed.

Singapore and Malaysia (previously the Federation of Malaya) were colonies of
the British Empire. Whereas Malaya soon became a commodity producer (rubber,
tin), Singapore was a trading post and administrative centre so a single language
for communication was essential. Standard English was used by the British, with
the assistance of English—educated Straits~born Chinese, to control this region

235Cambridge lnternationalA Level English Language

The port of Singapore, 1830.

 

For more about creolisation,
look back to page 179m Unit 5.

 

 

which was, and still is, a hub of world trade. There was much money to be made in
trading and effective communication between the many different ethnic groups was
essential for business to run smoothly.

In British Malaya, English was the language of the British administration whilst
Malay was spoken on the street, to avoid alienating the indigenous Malays.

Languages evolve wherever there is a mix of speakers, and in Malaya Standard
English soon moved out into the streets to be used and changed by non—English
speakers. It evolved in a pidgin form mixed with vocabulary from Malay and
Indian English, along with some Chinese dialects, and eventually came to be

and distinctive one, is called creolisation. This process happened in Singapore and
Singlish’ is now a fully formed variety of English.

The English taught in Singapore was British English and it was often taught
through missionary societies as well as schools to perpetuate the style of the
English spoken for government. It therefore closely resembled British English.
Words describing anti-social people, for example, named them as rascals, scallywags
and mischief—makers long after such terms had disappeared from mainstream
English vocabulary. This old—fashioned style became a distinctive feature of
Singapore English.

Political changes in the mid 19605 lessened the status of Standard British
English taught in Singapore schools. This was also accompanied by Britain’s decline
as a world power, while the inﬂuence of the USA grew and American English
became the form to aspire to.

Characteristic features of ‘Singlish’

l reduplication (exact repetition) of verbs: I cough, cough
I reduplication of adjectives to intensify meaning: this curry is hot hot
I a variety of phrases adopted from Malay or from Chinese dialects, depending

Ma: KEY TERMS

0’88 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Unit 6: English as a global language

I complex verb groups are often substituted by more description within the
sentence: my mother talk already (I have already spoken to my mother)

I it is often optional to use the verb to he: he so angry

I use of particles, mostly borrowed from Hokkien or Cantonese, to indicate an
attitude towards what is being said; they work rather like you know and you
see. Thé three most common particles are ah (usually expects agreement), lah
(strong assertion) and what (usually corrects something): I want to leave, lah.

l the subject of the sentence can be omitted: gone already (be has already gone)

I syntax is often abbreviated, as in the conditional tense: you do that I go away
(if you do that I’ll go away).

such as the Speak Good English Movement to emphasise the Importance of
Standard English.

Singlish is widely used and can be heard in some TV shows. Many young people
in Singapore code switch easily and maintain competence in this local form of
English as well as in Standard English. Singlish appears to be a permanent form of

the language in an ethnically mixed society and coexists with the Standard English
promoted by the government.

South African English

The provinces which make up South Africa have two major divisions of language
and culture — English and Afrikaans. South African English (SAE) is the dialect
of English spoken by South Africans, with the English varieties spoken by
Zimbabweans, Zambians and Namibians being recognised as offshoots.

The English language in South Africa (SAE) dates from the arrival of the
British at the Cape of Good Hope in 1795. Like other areas which became English
colonies, English was introduced into South Africa by soldiers and administrators,
then by missionaries, settlers, and fortune-seekers. English became more
established during the 19th century as a southern African language, as a result of
the British settlements of 1820 (in the Eastern Cape), 1848—51 (in Natal), and the
subsequent rushes to the diamond mines of Kimberley and the gold mines of the
Witwatersrand.

A power struggle developed between the English—speaking settlers and those
of Dutch descent, which eventually resulted in the Boer War of 1899—1901 and the
two languages coexisted throughout the 20th century. Afrikaans replaced English
as the language of government, administration, the police, and the armed forces,
and was the language closely associated with the repressive system of apartheid.
Afrikaans is a language which emerged from the Dutch language spoken by the
early settlers in South Africa. However, the English language remained a major
inﬂuence in business and higher education. It was also the language used by
the African National Congress and other liberation movements, as it enabled

 

237

_ . _ awn __ __-Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

The ANC used English to enable
effective communication between
different language speakers in Africa,
and with the rest ofthe world.

 

This situation continues today, with many ethnic groups within South Africa seeing

English as a means of advancement in society. As in many other multi—lingual

communities, English is considered to be neutral since it ensures that no local
dialect is viewed as more inﬂuential than any other.

 

 

Characteristics of South African English

I Settlers adopted words to describe landscape and social features unique to their
new environment: donga, impala, kmal (although some were derived from
Afrikaans). L

I The Afrikaans language has had an enormous inﬂuence on vocabulary and
syntax in SAE; 21 very widespread example is the use of ja (yes)

 

 

I Many SAE words have also been borrowed from the African languages of the
region: tsetse, tsotsz', kgotla, marula. As well as vocabulary, intonation also
reﬂects these languages.

There are many sources 0f I Vocabulary also came from other settlers. Malay words such as atchar, bobotie,

'nformaﬂon about south African sosatie, kaparmng, and kramat came into SAE during the 19th century (Via

Enl’h'id’n hre . .. . . .. .
g ‘5, WC U ‘ g some W e Afrikaans). Utese orlginated 1n the community of slaves and political ex11es at
you can listen to the accent and

SME Dispeech‘ The websites of the Cape, who were sent from what are now Indonesia and Malaysia during the 1
The Guardian newspaper, The 17th and 18th centuries. 
Rom/775i magazme and the I Some vocabulary current at the time of British settlement in South Africa is still 1

Oxford English Dictionary are

artwl H f [ maintained: geyser (a boiler), robot (traﬂﬁc light).
p i a yuse u.

I Different levels of SAE exist in the same way as Standard English and are an
indicator of social class.

Australian English differs from other varieties primarily in its accent and
vocabulary. The major features of the accent were established by the 18305. In the
period between colonial settlement in 1788 and the 18305, when the foundation
accent was established, new vocabulary to describe the new environment, especially
its ﬂora and fauna, was developed either from aboriginal languages (e.g. coolibah,

 

r,
\_Unit 6: English as a global language

 

wombat, wallaby, waratah) or from English vocabulary (e.g. native bear, wild
cherry). Many more vocabulary items were later added during the 19th—century
process of settlement and expansion. This was the usual process by which a colonial
society imposed its linguistic footprint on a subjected land.

At the end of the 19th century, something curious and largely unpredictable
happened to Australian English. Some Australian speakers modiﬁed their vowels
and diphthongs to make them closer to the British way of speaking. From the
1890s until the 19503, elocution teachers in Australia found that many people
wanted to ‘sound British’. These were Australians who wanted to be viewed as
upper class. This modiﬁed form of Australian speech came to be called Cultivated

     

a, e, i, o", u’ita'ndsometim I .

the core vol/rel sounds‘in English AUStl‘alian-

diph-thbhé CCmbI-na’tiqn of two . In response to this new British—based Cultivated Australian, another form of
vowel souindsWhe're’the tongue 7 Australian English developed in the ﬁrst part of the 20th century. This accent

glides from'one positiontos  . developed as Australian English which is most distinctive in its pronunciation

of the vowel sounds so that to many non—Australians, the pronunciation of words
such as mate or race sounds much like mite or rice. Unlike the Englishes developing
in African nations, English in Australia has always been more widely used than

the indigenous languages so that the characteristics of Australian English has

dominated both ofﬁcial and informal communication in the country.

   

Waltzing Matilda

Once a jolly swagman camped by a billabong, 239

Under the shade of a coolibah tree,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
‘Who’ll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me?’ ‘Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda
Who’ll come a—waltzing, Matilda, with me?’ .
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
‘Who’ll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me?’

Traditional Australian folk song.

swagman an itinerant bush traveller who carried all his

belongings wrapped up in a blanket or cloth called a

‘swag’.
billabong a waterhole near a river. It is an aboriginal word that

originally meant little or no water. ‘
coolibah tree a eucalyptus tree. It may be from the aboriginal I

name gulabaa. Since it was commonly found near
water, the white settlers may have changed its
pronunciation to reflect where it was found and the
shade it provided.

billy a tin can with a wire handle, used to boil water.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

x KEYTERMS

Australia’s everyday language is rich with slang that

  

ACTIVITY 6.16

1 Remind yourself of what you consider to be written Standard English.
Match your ideas with the verse of Waltzing Matilda and say to what
extent it conforms to Standard English. Explain any differences using
lexical and syntactical points, with examples from the article.

2 Compare the language in the song to the variety of English with which
you are familiar. What are the similarities and differences?

3 Is the language used in this song recognisable as English? What are its
strengths as a regional variety of English?

The characteristics of Australian English

I Informality with many abbreviations: Paton your lippie before you go to the
barbie (put on your lipstick before you go to the barbecue).

I Many sounds and syllables are left out; this is known as elision: g’day (good day,
hello).

I British or American English vocabulary may be followed: cell phone rather than
mobile.

I 'lhe rising intonation at the end of any statement, not just for a question,
is characteristic though it has travelled globally, probably through media
inﬂuence.

I Australia is a huge country and there is a surprising amount of similarity in
accents between places which are hundreds of miles apart.

I Today there are many languages competing with English particularly in urban
areas where sizeable immigrant groups have settled.

I lndividualised vocabulary which relates primarily, though not exclusively, to the
Australian environment (see below). '

The majority of Australians continued to speak with the accent that had been
established in the ﬁrst 50 years of settlement and this form of speech came to be
known as General Australian. "lhis widely spoken form of English coexists with
Cultivated Australian and Broad Australian. "lhese three forms of Australian
English came to carry with them very different sets of values. Cultivated
Australian, for example, was seen to express a longing for British values and
nostalgia for a country that was still regarded by many as ‘home’. Broad
Australian was strongly nationalistic and carried with it notions of an equal
society without out the rigid social class structures which Britain was thought
to have.

Read this article, taken from the Australian government website, about how the
history of Australia has affected the development of its language.

Kangaroo was borrowed even prior to colonisation.

reﬂects experiences from the country’s history. From The convicts gave us ‘muster’, ‘bolter’, ‘rollup’ and

borrowings of Aboriginal language words, through
convict sources, the gold rushes and bushranging, to

‘servants of the crown’. Bush rangers gave us the ‘bush
telegraph’. A key part of the Australian psyche, ‘the

the First World War, words have emerged to describe digger’, came out of the First World War — the term
essential aspects of the Australian character and identity. adapted from its use in the gold rushes.
6Unit 6: English as a global language

 

Australian slang utilised humour, wit, rhymes,
ﬂash language, the bizarre experiences of the bush
and the beach, the familiar and the personal, to realise

at something is similar to ‘giving it a burl’, and both
phrases reﬂect a history of Australian improvisation
and hard work as part of working in the bush.

terms that could describe experiences that were often

new or transforming. For example, ‘having a bash’

ACTIVITY 6.17

Using speciﬁc examples,
discuss the view that
regional varieties of English
reﬂect the culture and
history of the area in which
they are spoken.

http://australia.gov.au/about-australia/australian-story/austn—slang

All three forms of Australian English included most of the vocabulary
items that had developed in the second half of the 19th century, for
example billy and swag (see definitions earlier in this section), but also:

fossick to search for gold (perhaps a variant

of the midland and southern English
fussock — to bustle about)

the outback, the never-never
brumby

wild country, farfrom urban areas

a wild horse
larrikin

an urban hooligan

06* FURTHER RESEARCH r

  

British vs American English

It is sometimes said that the United Kingdom and the United States are two nations
separated by a common language. This seems to make no sense until we look at
some of the differences of vocabulary and expressions between the two nations.

The Emergence ofAmerican English

The ﬁrst European settlers in what became the United States were members of a
religious sect known as Puritans, who brought their English language with them.
They landed on Plymouth Rock, New England in 1620 and, over the years, were

followed by many thousands more migrants who travelled across the Atlantic for a
new life, often to escape religious intolerance.

Like settlers and colonists in other parts of the world, the settlers adapted
and changed the variety of English they spoke, discarding words which were no

\ ,Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

longer useful or relevant to their new lifestyle and rapidly adding a store of words
that were. Different landscapes, animals and food sources were a rich source of
new vocabulary and expressions as the settlers spread out across the continent.
Words like racoon, squash (for pumpkin) and moose were borrowed from the many
languages of the Native Americans.

There was a great deal of land on which to settle though large parts of it were
occupied by Native American tribes who all spoke separate languages. Apart from
words describing the natural habitat, very few Native American words entered
American English and references by the Europeans to describe the life of the
Native Americans were largely phrased in English such as pale face, war path and
Big Chief. However American English did adopt vast numbers of new words from
Europe and beyond. The Dutch came and shared coleslaw and cookies; the Germans
bought pretzels from delicatessens and the Italians arrived with their pizza, pasta,
pepperoni and many more.

Once independence had been gained from Britain and as a growing powerful
economic dominance in the western world, Americans developed their own
vocabulary to meet the needs of large—scale capitalism. Businesses become concerned
about breakeven and their bottom line, and whether they were blue chip or white
collar. The commuter needed a whole new system of freeways, subways and parking
lots before new systems of merger and downsizing could be invented. America
became a global superpower and conﬁdently sent some of its own English back across
the Atlantic so that the British in turn referred to cool movies and groovy jazz.

This borrowing of vocabulary has continued with more recent waves of

I immigrants from all parts of Asia and the Paciﬁc. As the United States continues
to dominate globally, American English has become the standard means of
communication throughout the world. Individuals and groups who wish to be a
part of this economic success do so through the medium of English.

American and British English vocabulary, phrasing and pronunciation remain
very diiferent from each other, although they are largely mutually understandable.
You have seen that language is constantly changing and these two distinctive
forms of English are evolving too. While America remains a superpower with
global inﬂuence, Britain’s place on the world stage is no longer as inﬂuential. From
these two relative positions, it should follow that American English should be the
one setting the standards for the English language. This issue is discussed in the
following article, with some surprising ﬁndings.

How is your English? Research shows
Americanisms AREN’T taking over
the British language

Anyone who has ever taken a ride  found that British English is alive and

in an elevator or ordered a regular 
coffee in a fast food restaurant 
would be forgiven for thinking that 
Americanisms are taking over the 

English language.

But new research by linguistic 
experts at the British Library has 

well and is holding its own against its
American rival.

The study has found that many
British English speakers are refusing
to use American pronunciations for
everyday words such as schedule,
patriot and advertisement.

9Unit 6: English as a global language

It also discovered that British 
English is evolving at a faster rate 
than its transatlantic counterpart, 
meaning that in many instances it is the 
American speakers who are sticking to 

more ‘traditional’ speech patterns.
Jonnie Robinson,

to differ.

‘But that doesn’t mean that British 
English speakers are sticking with 
pronunciations while 
American English speakers come up 

traditional

with their own alternatives.

‘In fact, in some cases it is the 
other way around. British English, for 
whatever reason, is innovating and 
changing while American English 
conservative and 

remains very
traditional in its speech patterns.’

As part of the study, researchers at 
the British Library recorded the voices 

curator of 
sociolinguists at the British Library, 
said: ‘British English and American 
English continue to be very distinct 
entities and the way both sets of 
speakers pronounce words continues 

of more than 10,000 English speakers
from home and abroad.

"lhe volunteers were asked to read
extracts from Mr Tickle, one of the
series of Mr Men books by Roger
Hargreaves.

They were also asked to pronounce
a set of six different words which
included ‘controversy’, ‘garage’, ‘scone’,
‘neither’, ‘attitude’ and ‘schedule’.

Linguists then examined the
recordings made by 60 of the British
and Irish participants and 60 of their
counterparts from the U.S. and
Canada.

When it came to the word attitude,
more than three—quarters of the
British and Irish contingent preferred
‘atti—chewed’ while every single
participant from the U.S. opted for
‘atti—tood.’

Tim Charrington, a dialect coach
who has worked with actors on the
West End stage, said it was true that
American speech patterns could be
more traditional.

TM“ W ,,.,.....,__,._.._‘,,WM.wwwqwfvmnvwww.mﬂiwnm.” ,,_,.,.u_.....,,~._.,vi .,. a. _

www.dailymail.co.uk

common understanding; all oﬂﬁcial government work is carried out through the
medium of American English.

American English has a variety of pronunciation and dialect forms and the
North American Accent is said to be a legacy of the sounds of English used in 17th—
century England. It is suggested that the distinctive Southern Drawl comes closest
to the manner of speech in England at the time of the ﬁrst migration. American

 

243Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

2

 

place. Here are some examples to start you off: girl, cop, hood, trunk,
thumb tacks, apartment, elevator, truck, buddy, diaper, gas, stroller, candy)
ﬂashlight, long-distance call.

Make a list of words and phrases in American English which have passed
into British English and are now used in the other English-speaking
regions, for example cool, to go, apartment, elevator.

From what you have learned in this section about the spread of dominant
languages, explain why American English is now a global language.

Look at the following constructions and discuss whether they are more
likely to be British or American English. Explain the reasons for your
answers.

I Is Sean here? No, he’s just left./Is Sean here? No, he just left.

I I didn’t read the book yet./ I haven’t read the book yet.

I May I take a shower?/May I have a shower?

I It’s a quarter past four./ It’s a quarter after four.

Read the article above about British and American English. Using the
information in the article and your knowledge of the differences between

these two varieties of English, assess which you think is more inﬂuential in
the world today.

Using case studies, evaluate to what extent you believe the idea that
‘Britain and America are two nations separated by a common language’.

 

.«o FURTHER RESEARCH

The very obvious differences between British and American English have been

extensively investigated and presented, often in a very—light hearted way. This is an

ideal topic for independent research followed by collaborative presentations.

Possible areas of research could include:

Language death

In this section you will explore the ways in which languages spread and decline and
how the spread of English may have contributed to the death of other languages
over the last 150 years. What is lost when a language dies? The number of language
spoken worldwide is expected to shrink rapidly in the coming decades. In 1992 a
prominent US linguist, Claude Hagége, predicted that by the year 2100, 90% of the
world’s languages will have ceased to exist.

early North American English vocabulary adopted from Native American peoples

vocabulary adopted from the waves of non—English—speaking migrants such as the

Germans, ltalians and Dutch l
different regional accents within the United States and theories about their origin. ’
British English vocabulary rarely used in the United States and American English

rarely used in Britain: some British celebrities appear on clips trying to guess what

a showty (young girl) or flossing (showing off) is while American participants do the

same for chin wag (a long chat) and chuﬁ‘ed to bits (very pleased about something);

there are many clips about American English vocabulary

differences in some grammatical constructions

the history of Canadian English and the dominance of French-speakers in Quebec
province.

”\
iUnit 6: English as a global language

 

in the world today are not being taught to children; when the next generation
shifts to another language, these languages will die outwith the last native
speakers.

or among themselves

I critically endangered: the youngest speakers are grandparents and older and
they speak the language only partially and infrequently

l extinct: the language is no longer spoken.

www.unesco.org

245Cambridge International A Level English Language

ACTIVITY 6.19

1 Latin is widely known as a ‘dead’ language. Is this true? If so, why does it
continue to be taught in some schools?

2 What other languages do you know which might be considered to be dead?
Are there any languages in this category in the country or region where
you live?

3 UNESCO states that Language diversity is essential to the human heritage.
What do you understand by this?

4 Does it matter if a language dies? Consider what beneﬁts a language gives
to the community who speak it. Give reasons for your answers.

a o 4 FURTHER RESEARCH

Language shift

Language death is far more likely to occur when the language of one group is
seen as less important than that of a more dominant language spoken in the same
region. For example, the Breton language in Brittany was perceived to be inferior
to French and until the 19503 children speaking Breton in the classroom and even
in the playground were forced to wear a clog (a very heavy wooden shoe, symbolic
of their lack of education) around their necks as punishment. Similar attitudes
prevailed in Wales for native Welsh speakers and in New Zealand for Maoris.
Where people believe that one language offers greater advantages for

employment and general advancement, that language will be promoted and spoken.

There may be no incentive to maintain the minority language, so it is unlikely to be
taught to children and the use of the language in the community is reduced until it
may only be spoken in the home and by older generations.

A minority language suffers when it is not taught in schools, used in the media
or in formal administrative situations such as courts. The language becomes
restricted to the home and in this way language shift, leading eventually to
language death, can happen over the course of only a few generations.

There are variations in this process according to attitudes of the speakers
and also in the extent of contact with other speakers of the minority language.

For example, younger people will often want to ‘get ahead’ especially where theyUnit 6: English as a global language

' g English. This was especially
important before the arrival of English—language TV.

Global English and language death

A national language must be recognised as a ‘real’ language, have a high status
and should enable and facilitate its speakers in their daily lives. We have seen that
English in all its many forms is spoken both as a native language and also as a
second language across the globe. Is it also a ‘killer language’? Is it a chief cause of
the death of minority languages?

   

  

ls English a killer language?
FOR
Papua New Guinea

  
  
  
    
 
   
   
  
  
 

AGAINST
Germany

    
  
 
   
  
 

 
   
  
 

Colonisation by Britain and later Australia
led to the development of a creole
language (standard Tok Pisin) essential
for native people’s improved economic
well-being. There was no official written
language and local languages were not
seen to offer any advantage so they
ceased to be spoken. Tok Pisin and English
became the lingua franca for both official
and unofficial communication in the

1 country.

Elements of English absorbed into another
language, for example German.

  

German is an established written and
spoken language and Germany is part

of the European Union where much
administrative business and many
technological advances are conducted

in English. Many Germans speak English
fluently so that the two languages coexist.
English words appear in the German
media and in music and are used quite
widely, especially by the young.

   
 
   
  
  
  
 

   
  
  
  
  
 
 

 
     

New Guinea

The linguist Suzanne Romaine reﬂected in 1992 on the past status of the
different languages in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. She said that To
speak English was good; to speak Tok Pisin was bad, but to speak Tok Ples [the local
language] was worst. The people of New Guinea were therefore made to feel that
they and their language were inferior to the dominant language, English.

is English under threat?

It is difﬁcult to believe that English itself maybe under threat, but you have learned
that different forms of English are evolving all the time. In the USA for example,
large numbers of Hispanic immigrants continue to speak their native Spanish and
this has led to a movement seeking to ensure that all Americans speak American
English, as this is seen to be beneﬁcial to the nation.

 

247Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

I The internationalisation of digital forms: teXting, emails and emoticons may
produce a language form that is international rather than English-based.

1 Discuss the arguments to I The illiteracy of its speakers and writers. There are frequent news items about
suggest that English itself graduates who are unable to use English — their native language — ﬂuently.
is under threat. can You I With the greater acceptance of the idea that all forms of English have equal
COIISU’UCt an argument, validity, these forms may continue to develop as separate languages.
115mg 1' Elevant examples’ I Mass migration of non-English—speaking populations to cities may create large
to support or refute the areas where English is not spoken.
idea of the decline 0f I The focus for technological and economic growth may pass from the US—
EngliSh? Western Europe axis to Asia, especially China and the Paciﬁc.

2 What, if any, educational
and media channels exist Can Language death be prevented?
to support a minority Case Study: Scottish Gaelic

language in your region?
Should there be more
provision for this and by
whom? Give reasons for
your ideas.

 

 

l

 

Gaelic (pronounced Ga-lek, not Gay-lik) is a Celtic language that was at one point
the predominant language in Scotland, but today is only really spoken in remote
areas of the northern and western Highlands. There are 20,000—30,000 native
Gaelic speakers worldwide, while more than 50,000 others claim to understand
the language. Some children learn the language, but there are serious problems in
language maintenance even in the core areas.

The General Register for Scotland in 2005 gave the following information: where 4’
both parents in a family were Gaelic speakers, 70 per cent of the children also spoke
Gaelic; where only one parent spoke Gaelic, just 23 per cent of the children spoke
the language.

The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005 gave ofﬁcial recognition to the
language but it is not an ofﬁcial language within the United Kingdom. Scottish
Gaelic is spoken:

I in Scotland, including rural areas of the Western Isles and Skye, and a few
locations in the rest of the Inner Isles and the Highland mainland

I by some speakers in immigrant communities in Nova Scotia and Prince Edward
Island in Canada.

f0

\Unit 6: English as a global language

There was a time when Gaelic appeared to be heading towards extinction, with

of the life of a people. When a language dies, a whole culture, a whole set of songs,
stories, legends and sayings die with it. As the French linguist Charles Hagege writes:
What we lose is essentially an enormous cultural heritage, the way of expressing the
relationship with nature, with the world, between themselves in the framework of their
families, their kin people  If Gaelic was allowed to die out, to give way to English,
then in many ways the Gaelic culture would die with it. The British Isles was once

a place of multiple languages and cultural diversity, and in order to preserve that
diversity, many people believe that Gaelic should be revitalised.

ACTIVITY 6.21

1 Discuss the following questions and give reasons for your points of View.

I Should we try to revive Gaelic, a language spoken only in small parts of
the Scottish Highlands and hardly anywhere else in the world?

I Why should the British government invest money in producing Gaelic
radio and TV programs? Why should schools start offering it alongside
French or German?

I Why should we put time, money and effort into breathing new life into
a language that some might say has reached a natural end?

I Do you believe that the fewer languages there are in the world, the
easier and more eﬂicient communication and interaction will become?
Give reasons for your point of View.

2 Governments in Wales and in New Zealand have been very proactive in
trying to revitalise their minority languages. The Welsh Government’s
pledge is to strengthen the place of Welsh in everyday life. The New Zealand
Government is committed to supporting the regeneration of te reo Maori
and has developed a Maori Language Strategy.

Investigate in detail the measures these governments have taken and
what effect these have had on the number of minority language speakers
in these countries.

3 Using the case study material above and/or from your own region, list the
beneﬁts of speaking minority languages even where English has become
the linguafranca. For example, should ofﬁcial and public notices and
documents be published in all the languages spoken in the region? Give
reasons for your answers.

4 Using speciﬁc examples, discuss whether the death of a language should
be allowed to take place in a country or region and possible actions which
could prevent this happening. The following articles will provide you with
some useful case study material.

 

 

249