Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

I conveying a particular memory or occasion in a way that wants us to ﬁnd out
more about what went on. For example: It was the day my grandmother exploded
// We started dying before the snow, and like the snow, we continued tofall

I using a general statement or metaphor which might thematically ‘set up’ what
is to come. For example: The past is aforez'gn country; they do things diﬂerently
there // It is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession ofa
goodfortune must be in want ofa wife.

In each of these cases, the common factor is that the opening raises questions in the
reader’s mind. For example The past is a foreign country; they do things diﬂerently
there suggests someone who is looking back, who perhaps questions the actions he
or she or others took as a younger person — and we want to know what happened in
that foreign country of past events.

Holding back information and in media res

ACTIVITY 3.35

Try coming up with four opening sentences for novels by ﬁnishing off these
prompts. They are similar to the examples given above. If you prefer, write
your own opening sentences for each type without using the prompts.

   
 
 

    

I Prompt

Ahead ofme 
It was three o’clock in the morning when she

Type of opening

 

Atmosphere ortone

 
   
    

Funny, surprising or shocking It was on a Sunday morning thatl woke up and

discovered . ..

 
 

142

    
 

   

Particular memory or occasion It all began when

Ten years ago, to this day...

     
 

Funerals are ...
Everybody knows that .. '

General statement or metaphor

     

Sometimes, an opening may not actually reveal very much information. The extract
below keeps the reader at a distance, not giving the names of the characters nor any
particular location. Only a few snippets of background information are revealed —
can you spot them?

Sometimes a piece of imaginative writing opens in the middle of an event or

A man tells about a letter his wife slipped under his door one night after
dinner. He can’t ﬁnd the letter anymore. Their two children are grown and
live away. The letter is not in her handwriting, but it says things only she could
know, and how she cannot go on with him. He skims different sections of the
letter, stopping a few times to go in the hall. The night’s unusually foggy. The
radio’s playing, and the light’s on — but he can’t bring himself to go into the
living room. He prides himself on his memory (he cites a variety of historical
facts): that evening he heard someone talking on the phone, muffled, as
though they didn’t want to be overheard. They hung up the phone. He heard
the front door close, and hurried out of the study. They rented this house

for the summer (his wife was used to living in the suburbs, not here in theUnit 3: Imaginative writing

 

country). His wife’s suitcase was on the porch, and she was outside. She was
with two horses. It seemed like a dream with the fog. Then the sheriff and

his assistant pulled up with a pickup for the horses. His wife had spotted the l
horses loose, and called the police. She tells the sheriff and his assistant that 
she’s leaving, and asks for a ride into town. i

l

From ‘Blackbird Pie’ by Raymond Carver.

narrative, preventing the reader from knowing exactly what is happening. As you
saw earlier, this is known as in media res. The extract below is an example of this.

You may notice how the writer of this extract also withholds certain information,

m

l

l

l
x . The moment that the bus moved on he knew he was in danger, for by the lights l l .
Discuss With a partner: I

of it he saw the ﬁgures of the young men waiting under the tree. That was the

I In what way is this thing feared by all, to be waited for by the young men. It was a thing he had ‘
passage in media res? talked about, now he was to see it for himself. l
It was too late to run after the bus; it went down the dark street like an l :
island of safety in a sea of perils. Though he had known of his danger only for l .
a second, his mouth was already dry, his heart was pounding in his breast,
something within him was crying out in protest against the coming event.

I How would the story
have been different if
it had started earlier?
Would it have been more
or less interesting?

From ‘The Waste Land’ by Alan Paton.

143

such as the names of the characters and the exact location. We join the story at a
point of suspense. The same technique can also be used to create a mysterious and
ghostly atmosphere as we see in this extract from the novella The Turn of the Screw:

 

The story had held us, round the ﬁre, sufﬁciently breathless, but except the
obvious remark that it was gruesome, as, on Christmas Eve in an old house,
a strange tale should essentially be, I remember no comment uttered until

somebody happened to say that it was the only case he had met in which such L  ‘
a visitation had fallen on a child.

From The Turn ofthe Screw by Henry James.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

There is no ‘right’ way to
write an opening — every
imaginative piece will begin
differently. However, if you
do not immediately engage
the reader with something
surprising or mysterious,
then you will probably need
to add a problem or unusual
occurrence soon afterwards!

ACTIVITY 3.37

Write the opening (120—150 words) of a different story which also begins in
the middle of an unexplained event and location. Base your answer on the
style and language of the extract.

Endings i ,

 
 

In this ﬁnal section you will brieﬂy explore different ways of ending pieces of

imaginative writing. Some types of endings may leave matters open while others
will try to draw matters to a close or a clear conclusion.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Open endings

Open endings are particularly useful if you are writing the initial chapter or
beginning of a novel or story where you are not required to bring your story to a
close. There are some very effective ways of using an open ending. For example) yOu
could use a cliffhanger, a way of leaving the reader in suspense or wondering how
things might develop, perhaps a little bit like leaving an ellipsis (. . .) at the end of a
sentence or paragraph. It is a useful way of engaging readers and encouraging them

‘ KEYTERMS

   

 

 

For another extract from Gone
With The Wind, see page 131.

She had gone back to Tara once in fear and defeat and
she had emerged from its sheltering walls strong and
armed for victory. What she had done once, somehow
— please God, she could do again! How, she did not
know. She did not want to think of that now. All she
wanted was a breathing space in which to hurt, a quiet
place to lick her wounds, a haven in which to plan her
campaign. She thought of Tara and it was as if a gentle
cool hand were stealing over her heart. She could see
the white house gleaming welcome to her through
the reddening autumn leaves, feel the quiet hush of
the country twilight coming down over her like a
benediction, feel the dews falling on the acres of green
bushes starred with ﬂeecy white, see the raw color of
the red earth and the dismal dark beauty of the pines
on the rolling hills.

She felt vaguely comforted, strengthened by
the picture, and some of her hurt and frantic regret
was pushed from the top of her mind. She stood for

ACTIVITY 3.38

Ambiguous endings
The ending of Gone With The Wind is open: we don’t know what Scarlett is going

to do the work. It is another way of showing and not telling, allowing the reader’s
imagination to come into play.

Read this example of an open ending which occurs at the close of the novel
Gone With The Wind. It concerns Scarlett and her future.

a moment remembering small things, the avenue

of dark cedars leading to Tara, the banks of cape
jessamine bushes, Vivid green against the white walls,
the ﬂuttering white curtains. And Mammy would be
there. Suddenly she wanted Mammy desperately, as
she had wanted her when she was a little girl, wanted
the broad bosom on which to lay her head, the gnarled
black hand on her hair. Mammy, the last link with the
old days.

With the spirit of her people who would not know
defeat, even when it stared them in the face, she'raised
her chin. She could get Rhett back. She knew she
could. There had never been a man she couldn’t get,
once she set her mind upon him. >

“I’ll think of some way to get him back. After all,
tomorrow is another day.”

From Gone With The Wind by Margaret Mitchell.

' In What way is this an to do, but it is not open to interpretation as we broadly know what she means —

‘open’ ending?

I How does it also
link back to the ﬁrst
description of Scarlett
that we get? (See page

that she is without Rhett and wants to win him back. However, some endings are
even more shrouded in diﬂiculty. An ambiguous ending leaves matters open to
interpretation and can be particularly useful if you have chosen to use an unreliable
narrator in your piece of imaginative writing.

Henry Iames’s story The Turn of the Screw describes how a governess looks

131-) after two children, Miles and Flora, in a rather isolated location, after their former
governess, Miss Iessel, has died. The new governess imagines that the children
are being visited and are in danger of being possessed by the spirits of Miss iessel
and a deceased former valet of the household, Peter Quint. The ambiguity of the
story lies in the issue of whether this is the case or whether it is all in the feverish
imagination of the nervous, but inexperienced, governess. The tension of this
dual perspective runs throughout the narrative and issue of whether the narrator

Q

\,My sternness was all for his judge, his executioner; yet
it made him avert himself again, and that movement
made ME, with a single bound and an irrepressible
Cry, Spring straight upon him. For there again, against
the glass, as if to blight his confession and stay his
answer, was the hideous author of our woe—the white
face of damnation. I felt a sick swim at the drop of

my victory and all the return of my battle, so that the
wildness of my veritable leap only served as a great
betrayal. I saw him, from the midst of my act, meet

it with a divination, and on the perception that even
now he only guessed, and that the window was still to
his own eyes free, I let the impulse ﬂame up to convert
the climax of his dismay into the very proof of his
liberation. “No more, no more, no more!” I shrieked,
as I tried to press him against me, to my visitant.

“Is she HERE?” Miles panted as he caught with
his sealed eyes the direction of my words. Then as his
strange “she” staggered me and, with a gasp, I echoed
it, “Miss Jessel, Miss Jessel!” he with a sudden fury
gave me back.

I seized, stupeﬁed, his supposition—some sequel
to what we had done to Flora, but this made me only
want to show him that it was better still than that. “It’s
not Miss Jessel! But it’s at the window—straight before
us. It’s THERE—the coward horror, there for the last
time!”

At this, after a second in which his head made
the movement ofa bafﬂed dog’s on a scent and then

 

DEborah Kerr in The Innocents, based on The Turn ofthe Screw.

(the governess) is unreliable or not meet reaches its climax at the conclusion of

the story. Readers are left to reach their own conclusions about the true source of
destruction—the ‘spirits’ or the pressure exerted by the governess.

gave a frantic little shake for air and light, he was at

me in a white rage, bewildered, glaring vainly over

the place and missing wholly, though it now, to my
sense, ﬁlled the room like the taste of poison, the wide,
overwhelming presence. “It’s HE?”

I was so determined to have all my proof that I
ﬂashed into ice to challenge him. “Whom do you mean
by ‘he’?”

“Peter Quint—you devil!” His face gave again,
round the room, its convulsed supplication.
“WHERE?”

They are in my ears still, his supreme surrender of
the name and his tribute to my devotion. “What does
he matter now, my own?—what will he EVER matter?
I have you,” I launched at the beast, “but he has lost
you forever!” Then, for the demonstration of my work,
“There, THERE!” I said to Miles.

But he had already jerked straight round, stared,
glared again, and seen but the quiet day. With the
stroke of the loss I was so proud of he uttered the
cry of a creature hurled over an abyss, and the grasp
with which I recovered him might have been that of
catching him in his fall. I caught him, yes, I held him—
it may be imagined with what a passion; but at the end
of a minute I began to feel what it truly was that I held.
We were alone with the quiet day, and his little heart,
dispossessed, had stopped.

From The Turn ofthe Screw by Henry James.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

“*FUR HERREAD

 

ACTIVITY 3.39

1 What key elements of
ambiguity does the
commentary pick up on
here?

2 Which of these would
you consider using in
your own writing?

Much modern writing is
deliberately unclear so it

can be useful to have a bank
of words or phrases at your
disposal to describe particular
features, such as ambiguous, r
unreliable, uncertain,
indistinct, layered.

 

‘ KEY TERMS

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Read this student commentary on the extract.

This sense of ambiguity is created in a number of ways. There is some
confusion over matters of perception in the story, over who sees

what, an idea which is symbolised by the use of a motif of a window
throughout the novella. The governess thinks the spirit of Peter Quint is
staring through the window whilst Miles believes it that of Miss Jessel,
perhaps making the reader wonder about the governess’ perception
about other events and characters in the story. The metaphors used

by the governess also hint at the possibility that she is the one — rather
than the spirit — who is trying to possess Miles and the one who causes
his death. She refers to herself as hisjudge, his executioner and the
capitalised ME alerts us to the fact that it is she ~ not any spirit - who
spring(s) upon the child and tried to press him against me. This sense of
possession is intensified in the ways that she regards herself as a kind

of moral champion, an idea conveyed by a further choice of metaphor:
the drop ofmy victory and all the return ofmy battle. indeed, she is intent
on possessing everything about the child: / was so determined to have

all myproof... The speech employed in the extract implicitly helps to
reinforce this sense of ambiguity. Miles’ response to her question is
“Peter Quint—you devill”: the final two words could suggest that Miles has
seen the spirit ofthe former valet at the window and has employed those
two words to describe what he has seen — or the final two words could
be addressed to the governess herself, suggesting that she is the source
of any demonic influence in the room. it is interesting to note that when
Miles dies, his little heart (is) dispossessed: is he no longer possessed by
the spirits — or by the forceful pressure placed upon him by his crusading
governess?

COMMENTARY

Closed endings 1 
A closed ending brings a degree of completion to the writing. A good example of
this is an ending where there is a twist or even a series of twists — an ending the
reader does not necessarily expect. This kind of ending might prove effective in
tasks where you are required to begin or end your imaginative writing with words
quoted in the task. at
This kind of ending works well when the planning and writing of the story have I?
included small clues which the reader only realises were there after encountering
the surprise at the close. Where a twist or a series of twists are simply added on
at the end and bear no relation to the narrative events, characters or implications
which have gone before, the writing will be contrived and awkward, an unsatisfying
experience for the reader because the unity and cohesion of the piece have been
sacriﬁced.
An example of a series of twists can be found in the short story ‘Don’t Look
Now’. The story describes how Laura and John, a married couple, have gone for a
break in Venice after the death of their young daughter. Laura has to return home
because their other child is taken ill but John stays in Venice where he is told by
a blind clairvoyant that he might be in some kind of danger. He is rather cynical
about the prediction. John thinks he sees Laura (even though she is apparently back

\ rm

 Discuss with a partner:

n

 I What is the twist here?
" I Is there more than one?

Unit 3: Imaginative writing

in England) and the clairvoyant going to a funeral. The idea that he can see things
is also suggested at the close of the story when he sees a child who resembles his
late daughter. On following the child, he discovers that she is, in fact, a very small,
deranged woman responsible for a number of murders in Venice. She stabs him
fatally and, as he dies, he comes to a point of realisation:

And he saw the vaporetto1 with Laura and the two sisters steaming down the
Grand Canal, not today, not tomorrow, but the day after that, and he knew
that they were together and for what sad purpose they had come. The creature
was gibbering in its corner. The hammering and the voices and the barking
dog grew fainter, and, ‘Oh God,’ he thought, ‘what a bloody silly way to die ...’

From ‘Don’t Look Now’ by Daphne du Maurier.

1 vaporetto a small passenger boat

of. 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

 

 

 

 

 

Summary
Remember this key point from this section:

I I Consider a range of openings and endings and the effect they can have on your
story, or any story you have read.

Practice and self-evaluation

In this section, you will get the chance to put into practice the skills you have
learned over the course of this unit. It is divided into two sections:

I commenting on descriptive texts and writing in response to them

I writing extended imaginative texts.

Commenting on and responding to descriptive texts

In this section, you will:

read two passages of descriptive/narrative writing
write commentaries on them
write in response to the given texts

evaluate your answers.

ACTIVITY 3.41

The following extract describes an impressive chateau.
A Comment on the style and language of the extract.

B Write a description (120—150 words) of another magical place. Base your
answer closely on the style and language of the original extract.

147The chinchilla clouds had drifted past now and outside
the Montana night was bright as day. The tapestry
brick of the road was smooth to the tread of the great
tires as they rounded a still, moonlit lake; they passed
into darkness for a moment, a pine grove, pungent and
cool, then they came out into a broad avenue of lawn
and John’s exclamation of pleasure was simultaneous
with Percy’s taciturn “We’re home.”

Full in the light of the stars, an exquisite chateau
rose from the borders of the lake, climbed in marble
radiance half the height of an adjoining mountain,
then melted in grace, in perfect symmetry, in
translucent feminine languor, into the massed
darkness of a forest of pine. The many towers, the
slender tracery of the sloping parapets, the chiselled
wonder of a thousand yellow windows with their
oblongs and hectagons and triangles of golden light,
the shattered softness of the intersecting planes of
star—shine and blue shade, all trembled on John’s spirit
like a chord of music. On one of the towers, the tallest,
the blackest at its base, an arrangement of exterior
lights at the top made a sort of ﬂoating fairyland—
and as John gazed up in warm enchantment the faint
acciaccare sound of violins drifted down in a rococo
harmony that was like nothing he had ever heard
before. Then in a moment the car stopped before wide,
high marble steps around which the night air was
fragrant with a host of ﬂowers. At the top of the steps
two great doors swung silently open and amber light
ﬂooded out upon the darkness, silhouetting the ﬁgure
of an exquisite lady with black, high—piled hair, who
held out her arms toward them.

Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

“Mother,” Percy was saying, “this is my friend,
John Unger, from Hades.”

Afterward John remembered that ﬁrst night as a
daze of many colors, of quick sensory impressions, of
music soft as a voice in love, and of the beauty of things,
lights and shadows, and motions and faces. There
was a whitehaired man who stood drinking a many-
hued cordial from a crystal thimble set on a golden
stem. There was a girl with a ﬂowery face, dressed like
Titania with braided sapphires in her hair. There was
a room where the solid, soft gold of the walls yielded
to the pressure of his hand, and a room that was like
a platonic conception of the ultimate prism—ceiling,
ﬂoor, and all, it was lined with an unbroken mass of
diamonds, diamonds of every size and shape, until, lit
with tall violet lamps in the corners, it dazzled the eyes
with a whiteness that could be compared only with
itself, beyond human wish or dream.

Through a maze of these rooms the two boys
wandered. Sometimes the ﬂoor under their feet
would ﬂame in brilliant patterns from lighting
below, patterns of barbaric clashing colors, of pastel
delicacy, of sheer whiteness, or of subtle and intricate
mosaic, surely from some mosque on the Adriatic Sea.
Sometimes beneath layers of thick crystal he would
see blue or green water swirling, inhabited by vivid
ﬁsh and growths of rainbow foliage. Then they would
be treading on furs of every texture and color or along
corridors of palest ivory, unbroken as though carved
complete from the gigantic tusks of dinosaurs extinct
before the age ofman. . . .

From ‘The Diamond as Big as the Ritz’ by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

5%

\n,ACTIVITY 3.42

Unit 3: Imaginative writing

The following extract is from a story in which an insurance agent Visits a

client.

A Comment on the style and language of the extract.

B Continue the extract (120—150 words). You do not have to bring your
writing to a conclusion. Base your answer closely on the style and language
of the original extract.

I drove out to Glendale to put three new truck drivers
on a brewery company bond, and then I remembered
this renewal over in Hollywoodland. I decided to
run over there. That was howI came to this House of
Death, that you’ve been reading about in the papers.
It didn’t look like a House of Death when I saw it. It
was just a Spanish house, like all the rest of them in
California, with white walls, red tile roof, and a patio
out to one side. It was built cock-eyed. The garage was
under the house, the ﬁrst ﬂoor was over that, and the
rest of it was spilled up the hill any way they could get
it in. You climbed some stone steps to the front door,
so I parked the car and went up there. A servant poked
her head out. “Is Mr. Nirdlinger in?”

“I don’t know, sir. Who wants to see him?”

“Mr. Huff.”

“And what’s the business?”

“Personal.”

Getting in is the tough part of my job, and you

don’t tip what you came for till you get where it counts.

“I’m sorry, sir, but they won’t let me ask anybody in
unless they say what they want.”

ACTIVITY 3.43

It was one of those spots you get in. If I said some
more about “personal” I would be making a mystery
of it, and that’s bad. If I said what I really wanted, I
would be laying myself open for what every insurance
agent dreads, that she would come back and say, “Not
in.” IfI said I’d wait, I would be making myselflook
small, and that never helped a sale yet. To move this
stuff, you’ve got to get in. Once you’re in, they’ve got
to listen to you, and you can pretty near rate an agent
by how quick he gets to the family sofa, with his hat on
one side of him and his dope sheets on the other.

“I see. I told Mr. Nirdlinger I would drop in, but—
never mind. I’ll see if I can make it some other time.”
It was true, in a way. On this automobile stuff,
you always make it a point that you’ll give a reminder
on renewal, but I hadn’t seen him for a year. I made
it sound like an old friend, though, and an old friend
that wasn’t any too pleased at the welcome he got. It

worked. She got a worried look on her face. “Well—
come in, please.”

From Double Indemnity by James M. Cain.

The extract below is from a story in which a woman’s life changes as the result

of a shopping trip.

A Comment on the style and language of the extract

8 The same writer publishes another short story involving the same central
character. Write a section (120—150 words) of the story. You do not have to
bring your writing to a conclusion. Base your answer closely on the style
and language of the original extract.

149It may seem odd to those ofyou who did not know
her but at the time the very simplest of acts became
disjointed in her mind. Or so she was told. Her life,
something that looked so much like an open book,
became complicated. Or so it seemed. It began with
such a simple act. The shops. Shopping. An ordinary
enough pastime but something that led her into
an unfamiliar world. Decisions made without her
knowledge. For the best. A phrase that she would hear
again and again. She distrusted it. The taste of it. For
the best. The sound ofit. For her it was the beginning.
The beginning of her distrust. The sound ofa door
slamming shut. Shut against her. Shutting her in.
Spring was early that year. Flower stalls began to
sell the sunshine buds. Just looking at the bright array
was enough to put a spring in anyone’s step. A crisp
Spring day. A day similar to many other days in her
life. Similar but different. They went to the shops. A
journey that was familiar as the parade of shops itself.
Usually she only had time for a brief nod or ﬂeeting
smile as she hurried on her way past friends and
neighbours. Armed with shopping bags and with her
head full of worries she would make her way along
the invisible path. An invisible string would pull her

Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

along the path, that well-worn path that recognised
each footstep and guided her to her destination. To
places that she recognised and that recognised her.
But this time it was different. She had time to browse.
She found it difﬁcult not to worry about the mundane
things — like the peas defrosting, or what birthday
present to buy his sister. She remembered thinking
about the peas. Should they try another brand? It was
so boring buying the same things every week. Did they
buy his sister a photograph frame last year? Or was it
someone else? It’s strange what passes through your
mind on these occasions.

But this visit was hers. All hers. They were going to
buy clothes. Just for her. Clothes for the evening and
maybe something to wear on the beach. Something
light and airy with added layers if it became cooler
later. And why not? She deserved a weekend away. It
had been a long time since she had done anything for
herself, without the added burden of thinking what
the family might think or need or want. Working
around their lives. Their schedules. Their traumas.
But what about her? Didn’t she have a life too?

From ‘The Visit’ by Sue Thakor.

Imaginative writing tasks

In this section, you will:

I write extended responses to a range of imaginative writing'tasks.

ACTIVITY 3.44

Choose one of the following tasks. (You should write 600—900 words.)

1 Write the opening to a novel called The Prisoner in which a narrator
describes his or her experiences of being captured and held captive. In
your writing, create a sense of the narrator’s outlook and mood.

2 Write two contrasting descriptive pieces (300—450 words each) about a
location immediately before the arrival of a storm and some days after it
has passed. In your writing, create a sense of setting and atmosphere.

3 Write a descriptive piece called The Deserted School. In your writing focus
on colours, sounds and textures to help your reader imagine the scene.

 

rCambridge International A Level English Language

 

‘ ’:  - Text and discourse analysis

In this A Level part of your English Language course you will build on the skills
which formed the basis of your AS Level programme. During your AS studies yOu:

I studied the conventions of a number of different text types as well as analysing
how they are constructed
I practised effective passage—based text analysis and learned how to identify 
language features using appropriate examples, giving an evaluation of the eﬂects L
of these features If:
I explored examples of English Language material, ﬁction and non—ﬁction, from
the past and present, and from a range of sources 
I considered the form of a text, its layout as well as the context in which it has
been produced, its purpose and style.

You have learned that texts representing scripted speech take on the features of
written language. Unscripted speech follows a different set of conventions and you
will explore these in this opening unit of Part 2.

 

Situations where conversational Illere is general agreement that speech in communication is what deﬁnes us as
Speed1 may be USEd- humans and it is a critically important part of our interaction with others. Consider
the following questions:

Why do we speak?

What do we speak about?

We speak differently to different types of people. Why do you think that is?
How do you start a conversation? How do you ﬁnish it?

How do you manage a conversation when several people are talking?

What makes a conversation interesting or boring?

You will explore these questions in this unit on spoken language.

(1

\ﬁrUnit 4: Text and discourse analysis

   

  

TIP

Because conversation is something we do so naturally, it can be very easy to
be descriptive ratherthan analytical when answering questions about spoken
language. Here are some tips to help you avoid this:

1 Look at and learn the features of conversation so that they become familiar
to you.

2 When answering questions about spoken language, read each piece of

discourse to ascertain its purpose then identify the features which will help
you support yourideas.

Explain the effects ofthe features and give an illustrated example.

ACTIVITY 4.1

1 You need to identify yourself by your voice to someone who is unable to
see you. How would you describe your voice? Deep, high—pitched, squeaky,
mellow? Is describing a voice an easy thing to do: why or why not?

2 Going by voice recognition only, what clues are there in a person’s voice to
help us estimate their age and gender?

       
        
     
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 

3 Before referring to a biology textbook, name the parts of your anatomy
involved in speech production and the function of each.

Features of spoken language 153

Whatever your native language(s), you are already an expert in the skill of speech.
,You may hesitate on occasions while you think of what to say, but most of the time
when you engage in conversation, especially with your friends, you are ﬂuent and
rarely have to stop to consciously consider what you are going to say and how you
are going to say it.

Although we all have distinctive patterns of speech, which we will examine in
a later chapter, we conform to certain features of unscripted speech. Discourse
(patterns of speech) is not governed by the same rules as writing. Our discourse is
in utterances (complete units of speech bounded by silence) and not sentences and
these utterances are not transcribed in the same way as written language.

Unlike the majority of what we write, which can be redrafted and polished
to achieve the desired effect, most speech is spontaneous and we need strategies
to make it ﬂow as smoothly as possible, though there are times when inevitably
we say the wrong thing! Public speaking such as speeches, sermons, lectures,
commentaries and scripts, shares more common features with written language
while text, SMS messages and much other digital communication blurs the
boundaries between speech and writing still further.

 

o a 6 FURTHER RESEARCH