Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Here are two extracts from news articles about languages in various parts of the
world which are dying or dead. With the exception of the Andes region, where
Spanish dominates, English will replace the local languages.

ACTIVITY 6.22

Read the article (right) about
language death in a small
community in Cromarty, a
remote region in the Scottish
Highlands. What are the
processes which might have
led to the death of this local
language?

 

For more practice and self-
evaluation on this unit, see
page 291.

In Australia, where nearly all of the 
231 spoken aboriginal tongues are 
endangered, researchers came upon 
such tiny language communities as 
the three known speakers of Magati 
Ke, in the Northern Territory, and the 
three Yawuru speakers, in Western 
Australia. In July, they met the sole 
living speaker of Amurdag, a language 
in the Northern Territory that had 

already been declared extinct.

“This is probably one language 
that cannot be brought back, but at 
least we made a record of it,” linguist 
researcher, Dr. Anderson said, noting 
that the Amurdag speaker strained to 
recall words he had last heard from his 

late father.

Many of the 113 languages spoken 
in the Andes Mountains and Amazon 
basin are poorly known and are rapidly 

giving way to Spanish or Portuguese,
or in a few cases, to a more dominant
indigenous language. In this region,
for example, a group known as the
Kallawaya use Spanish or Quechua in
daily life, but also have their own S€Cret
tongue, used mainly for preserving
knowledge of medicinal plants, some
of Which were previously unknown to
science.

The dominance ofEnglish threatens
the survival of the 54 indigenous
languages of the Northwest Paciﬁc
plateau of North America, a region
including British Columbia, Oregon
and Washington. Only one person
remains who speaks Siletz Dee-ni, the
last of many languages once spoken on
a reservation in Oregon.

www.nytimes.com

Final word from Cromarty:
Scottish Black Isle dialect silenced forever
as last native speaker dies aged 92

Bobby Hogg was the last person still
ﬂuent in the ﬁsherfolk dialect. It was a
traditional dialect used for centuries
by ﬁsherfolk. But it emerged that the
language of Cromarty had ﬁnally died
with the passing of its last speaker.

Bobby Hogg was the only person still
ﬂuent in the ageeold tongue ofthe Black
isle and his death at the age of 92 means
it will now exist only in audio recordings,

But the Hoggs were from the ﬁshing
community. in 2007, the brothers were
recorded by Am Baile, the project that has
created a digital archive ofthe history and
culture ofthe Highlands and islands.

l\/lr Hogg said: ’Our father was a
ﬁsherman and all his folk had been
ﬁshermen stretching way back. It was
the same on our mother’s side too, When
we were young, we talked differently in
the ﬁshertown to the rest ofCromarty.
it wasn’t written down. it was an oral
culture. We had this sort of patois, which
i think had both Doric and Gaelic in
it. There were words, a lot to do with
the ﬁshing, which nobody else could
understand. it is dying out. You hear a
smattering in some things people from
Cromarty say, but nobody speaks it
ﬂuently but for us.’

www.dailymail.co.uk

4L .Unit 7: Child language acquisition

 
 

Unit 7: Child language acquisition

TIP

As you work through this unit
you will find it helpful to talk
to infants and children that
you know wherever possible.

Adjust your language and
speaking style to the level of
conversational competence
ofthe child and you will
observe how even a very

young child can take part in a
conversation.

 

 

 

The main stages of early development

In this unit you will explore the journey of infant and childhood language
acquisition. You will gather information, ideas and theories about the stages that
babies, infants and young children pass through in order to become proﬁcient in
the language(s) spoken around them. You will also be made aware of the critical
importance of the family and community with whom they come into contact.

You may also be amazed at the speed at which young children learn language and
become conﬁdent conversationalists. This unit also examines teenage language use.
It must be emphasised that children do not all go through these stages at the
same age, so some degree of approximation is essential. However, all children do go

through the stages in the same sequence, so although each child will learn language
at his or her own pace, the stages they go through can be predicted.

Before birth

The acquisition of language skills is an extraordinarily complex process which
most linguists believe starts before birth. Research in France (Mehler et 61]., 1988)
found that French babies as young as four days old were able to distinguish French
from other languages. When they were exposed to French being spoken, the babies
sucked more vigorously (suggesting increased interest) than when they heard
English or Italian. This has led to speculation that even before birth babies become
attuned to the rhythm and intonations of the language around them.

251

The first year

The similar pattern of language development across cultures suggests a universal
sequence of events in the process of language acquisition. All new parents quickly
become aware of the sounds made by their newborn infants and can begin to
distinguish the reasons'for different sorts of cries, for example hunger or distress.
It would appear that these cries are not language-speciﬁc. A newborn baby’s cry in

Nigeria is the same as that of a newborn in India; language differences are not yet
apparent.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

 

 Formore abouttum-taking,
look back at page 154 in Unit 4.

 

The baby’s ﬁrst smile at around six weeks is accompanied by ‘cooing’ and repetitive
sounds. The baby starts to make these repeated sounds — reduplication — such as
baba, gaga as the vocal chords develop the motor skills needed for the eventual
production of speech. This is followed at about six months by more sustained
‘babbling’ where the child’s sounds more closely resemble those of the language
they will speak.

At this and every stage, parents and family will help the child’s development
by speaking to them. Even though the baby does not understand the speciﬁc
meaning, learning about conversational skills is already taking place at this stage.
This caretaker language of the parent initiates and teaches turn-taking. The style of
caretaker language is very distinctive. It is the language used by family and friends
who speak to the baby in a higher and lighter tone than normal speech and with
frequent repetition of words which are important in the infant’s world (e.g. lovely
boy; happy baby; who’s mummy’sfavourite girl?). In reply, the baby can make all
manner of noises including spluttering, blowing bubbles and ‘raspberries’ with the
lips together; the baby is exploring its vocal repertoire. Babbling to its parents or
carers enables the baby to develop its organs of speech production.

PARENT hello Maya 0 hello (.) who’s a lovely girl  aah (.)
BABY [gurgles]
PARENT yes she is  she’s mummy’s best girl

BABY [smiles]

The infant smiles, coos and burbles, while the parent or caregiver replies with a
range of words and smiles, and often with hugs, cuddles and close contact. These
‘conversations’ teach the conventions of turn—taking and the repetition of key words
leads in time to an understanding of vocabulary and syntax.

Even babies aged between 0—3 months can differentiate between voices and will
turn in response to a familiar one. They are likely to quieten if they are crying as
human voices appear to be comforting from the earliest age.

In the early months of a baby’s life, the individual sounds or phonemes they
produce are not culturally speciﬁc. At around ten months, these sounds develop
into those that the child will use as a native speaker so that noises made by babies
from different cultures are now signiﬁcantly different. At around this time the
baby may also start to point, wave and babble in a way that more closely resembles
speech. The baby comes to recognise simple and often repeated phrases such as bye
bye or night night along with the names of family members and favourite toys.

ACTIVITY 7.1

1 Carry out an individual investigation of a parent and infant under one
year old. If possible, try to observe the baby’s progress over a period of
a month, as you should see signiﬁcant developments during that time.
Interview parents or caregivers about the ways in which they talk to their

baby: what phrases do they remember using? When do they talk to their
baby?