Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

The structure of unscripted conversation

Conversations take place between two or more participants. Much unscripted
conversation follows recognisable conventions which we develop through early life.
By now you have already become a conversational expert!

The following features of discourse are listed separately for clarity but in
speaking we often use many of these features at the same time. It is important
to look at conversations in context (who is talking and why) rather than just
identifying individual features.

I Opening greetings Conversation openings are usually formulaic to help ease
the participants into the conversations. Greetings such as g’day, howdy, howzit,
hiya, hello, good morning, nice day, how are you? establish feelings of mutual
ease. These formulaic greetings may be accompanied by body language and
gestures such as handshakes or kissing and hugging. Participants who are
strangers will usually introduce themselves with their full name.

I Turn-taking Conversation is usually co-operative with participants
taking turns. Quite frequently speakers overlap, though this has to be
done with sensitivity as in many cultures interrupting is considered rude.
Conversationalists have to make instant, ﬁnely discriminating judgements 2i

 

Look at the section on The
language ofsoc/o/ groups later in

this unit for more about social about when to start their turn — this may be done hundreds of times a day in

language and interaction. every conversation. When a conversation is not co—operative, for example in an
argument, participants adopt very different strategies, often with unpleasant
outcomes.

I Adjacency pairs ‘Statement’ and ‘response’ are the basis of conversation. These
often consist of a question/exclamation/declaration from Participant A followed ‘
by a response from Participant B and any others. The responses can be of any /
length and can extend to three-part exchanges where the ﬁrst speaker responds
and so the conversation continues. For example:

Teacher: What is the capital ofNew Zealand?

 

Pupil: Auckland miss F j
Teacher: No, try again(.) think hard 
Pupil: Wellington, miss.

Teacher: Good, that’s right

I Holding the ﬂoor In discourse, the person speaking is said to be holding the
conversational ﬂoor. When someone is about to ﬁnish their turn we use a
variety of strategies to determine who will take over:

— we can name them (e.g. Hasfah was there, she knows about it)

— we can complete what we are saying (e.g. and so I got thoroughly soaked.)

— we can hesitate; it only takes a fractionally longer pause than usual for
someone to ﬁll the silence; in fact silences can denote some tension in

 

discourse

— we can use sound and body language

— our voice may start to fall and we may look more closely at those who are
about to take their conversational turn.

I Clashing When two people start to speak at the same time the clash is
acknowledged — one participant must stop while the other continues. As in
other aspects of conversation, status and context are important here.
‘Managing’ a conversation is related to the context and to the relative status
of the speakers.

WWW .. -MAWWVW“__MW‘ KEY TERMS

See the first section of Unit 5
on page 174 for more about
the importance of context in
discourse.

 

To familiarise yourselfwith the
symbols used in transcribed
speech, turn to page 169.

g

 

Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

I Repairing During the conversation, participants are constantly monitoring
themselves and those to whom they are speaking. A speaker may repair what

they say, correcting themselves or using phrases to acknowledge their mistake,
for example I mean, Ishould have said, no, that’s wrong, or I wanted to say.

In this way there is instant updating of information and self—correction in
conversation. Sometimes another participant will correct the speaker’s mistake
for them.

I Topic shift Conversation is dynamic and spontaneous. We talk about all sorts
of things, people and ideas and these topics change frequently. Management of
topic shift is most commonly achieved with formulaic expressions, such as Oh,
by the way  or  which reminds me

I Conversation endings Closing a conversation also has formulaic utterances
with standard phrases such as see you later, bye, nice to see you; or we may make
plans to be in contact again with phrases such as Come round sometime or See
you next week which may signal a very vague or more speciﬁc intention. As with
other forms of conversation, body language reinforces the discourse: we may
check the time; start to pack away belongings, stand up or turn away.

ACTIVITY 4.2

1 Watch and listen to the conversations around you and gather information
on the following:
I how people open conversations
I styles of greeting
I how topic shifts occur
I how conversations are brought to an end.~

2 Cultural differences produce a range of conversational Styles in the
English—speaking world. Using speciﬁc examples, discuss the differences

you observe in the conversations around you and try to evaluate why they
occur.

interviews — structured conversations

We talk in a variety of different circumstances. Many public forms of speaking

are in the media and although these are unscripted, they take place in a fairly
structured environment. The conventions are often clearer to see as an introduction
to spoken language.

ACTIVITY 4.3

Read the following transcript and look carefully at the interaction between
the speakers. Note particularly how the conversation moves from one
participant to the next.

Consider the differences between this type of conversation and those you
hear around you. Why are media texts such as soap operas presented without
the non-ﬂuency features of speech?

155156

 

Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

‘ KEY TERMS

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Transcript

Context: Pearl Nxele interviews Melinda Barn about her entryfor the Miss South
Africa pageant.

PEARL I mean you had a hectic schedule then  why (.) what made you
think to enter Miss S A even though you had all of that going

on (.)

MELINDA well  I was actually scouted back  2009 then (1) erm  as I 
said (.) I didn’t have much conﬁdence  so I thinkI decided  Z
well  um  you know what (.) much as I’m not where I want to L
be (.) or  who I want to be at the time (.) I  I  should enter
and  um  see how it goes

www.youtube.com

Features of unscripted conversation

The following section explains the most signiﬁcant features of language used in
conversation. Although we see a huge number of ‘tidied—up’ conversations in the
media, the conventions listed below are regular features of unscripted language.
Because you will use many or even all of these features yourself in your everyday
conversations, you should be able to recognise them and give additional examples
from your own patterns of speaking.

I Phatic communion is the name for the polite ‘ice—breakers’ we use when
greeting people in order to initiate a conversation. We then usually continue
with more meaningful topics. Inevitably in English, the weather is often used
(e.g. Nice/awfal/freezing/scorching weather we’re having) as well as health, with
the general query, how are yoa?, or something more informal. Often both
participants will say the same thing and a serious reply is not usually expected.
How do you greet people?

It“

I Adjacency pairs are the rather standard interactions between people. They are
often in the format of question and answer, for example goodbye, see you soon/
yes you too, take care.

I Voiced pauses are the urns and ers and you knows used when we can’t express
exactly what we want to say. These non—ﬂuency features or ﬁllers give us time
to think and/or to announce we are going to say something when the sound
is extended (e.g. mmm). A voiceless pause is when there is a silence; it is
interesting that these pauses do not have to be very long before people perceive
a break in the conversation. Try a silence of three to four seconds and see how
your respondent reacts. There is a lot of non—ﬂuency in unscripted discourse. 1

I False starts are also part of non—ﬂuency features when a speaker realises they
have made an error and attempts to repair the error often by use of meta
language — language which talks about language, for example I mean to say, I
should have mentioned. Often the utterance is reformulated for greater clarity
and repairs the conversation.

I Repetition in conversation is common for many reasons. We may deliberately I
repeat for emphasis or unintentionally to gain thinking time in order to l
continue the conversation. ;! KEY TERMS

 

 

ACTIVITY 4.4

Give some examples of
transactional language.

  

Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

Turn-taking is how most conversations are managed but by no means always —
sometimes participants cut in before their turn.

Overlaps and interruptions are also linked to lack of ﬂuency. How do you know
when the other person has ﬁnished speaking? When you both start speaking

at once, who carries on? Interruptions can sometimes border on rudeness
depending on the context. When might this be so?

Hedges/vague language is a strategy used when you want to avoid coming to
the point or saying things directly, for example kind of, you know what I mean,
actually, basically. These soften the force of what is said and are useful strategies

when we want to negotiate a point of view. These are often used in conjunction
with modality (see below).

Modality is a conversational strategy which allows us to introduce different
options and compromises for negotiation between participants. Some of the
most common examples are perhaps, probably, normally, slightly, maybe. We can
also reﬂect this hesitancy in the verb structure by the use of modal — or ‘helper’
— verbs, for example may, might, could, should.

Ellipsis is the omission or slurring (eliding) of syllables, which is also associated
with informal English, for example gonna, don’t, wanna.

Transactional language is discourse to get things done and with a speciﬁc
purpose. Much of our speech, other than chatting, is transactional, for example

Put the rubbish out, I’d like a Thai curryplease, You need to be eighteen to see
thisﬁlm.

When we are certain about a situation, we tend to be assertive both in our manner

and in our speech, using constructions to show that something is deﬁnite. This

157

certainty is referred to as high modality. Compare it will be necessary to ﬁght with
it might be possible to avoid conﬂict, which is much less certain. Elision is where
the meaning of an utterance is generally understood between the participants and
so can be shortened to focus the topic. We omit much in our conversation which is
mutually understood; for example in the exchange Are you coming over this week?/
Might be, the pronoun I and the participle coming are omitted which gives a more
relaxed and informal tone.

This is an example of a transcript of a very speciﬁc context and with a deﬁned

purpose.

ACTIVITY 4.5

Read the transcript. Discuss what features this transcript shares with other
unscripted conversations and then any features which are context dependent.

Context and participants
Female 23, hairdresser’s receptionist) (R), male 25, (client) (C), female 30,
hairdresser (H)

R

C

R

hello sir
hiya, I’ve got an appointment for 2.15 but I’m a bit early

that’s ﬁne do you want to hang up your jacket and take a seat over there
 urn Tricia will see you  ’bout 5 minutes  tea  coffee158

Cambridge InternationalA Level English Language

COMMENT

thanks, it’s cold outside
yeah

[waits]

morning Neil

hi

How much do you want of

(.) er  I like to keep the top long (.) then well (.) maybe side  side
clipped I mean parting  thinned  and (2) fringe too

yeah

I’ll clip a bit  layers style

good  been too long  am so busy—//
//yeah  always somethin’ to do

This is an everyday activity which shows language in action where the
participants are directly involved. They have a purpose in conversing as
they have to agree on how the hair will be cut (this is transactional) but
they also chat about general topics to be sociable (this is interactional).
Most of the transcript is in adjacency pairs.

The different forms of greeting show the conversational conventions
of politeness — phatic communion with varying forms of greeting (hello,
hi, hiya) to reﬂect the diiferent levels of status between client and service
provider as well as familiarity between the participants. The client may
have been coming to get his hair cut by this hairdresser for a while so
shared knowledge of their requirements can be assumed.

There may be long silences in this type of interaction where actions
such as hair washing are taking place.

Many of these utterances are elliptical as the context is understood:
(wouldyoa like) tea (or) coﬂee; How much (hair) do you want (cut) 01??

Even though the client is quite speciﬁc about the requirements, he
still uses hedges and ﬁllers: maybe side (.) Slide clipped. Perhaps the skills
of the hairdresser give her a higher status in this context and the client
wants to soften his requests.

0 0 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

 

v A, ﬁlmﬁi‘i‘ﬁnﬁﬁmbj AUnit 4: Text and discourse analysis

 

Characteristics of unscripted conversation

,1 This section introduces the characteristics of unscripted conversation. Although
these are invariably used with the features already explained, they are more ,
concerned with the interaction between the participants and the establishment of ]
working relationships in the discourse. ]

I Back-channel items are often sounds rather than full words (e.g. um, yeah,
right) and are used primarily to reassure the speaker (S) that the listener (L)
is following the conversation. Sometimes back-channel responses merge with
speaking turns, though the respondent may not wish to take a turn as in the
following example:
[8:] I remember how bad it was when I was a kid [L2 oh] my dad was working
away (.) things were awful and my mum (.) it was so hard for her (.) she (.) she
had to sell some jewellery belonging to my gran [L2 really] to pay for my clothes
and stuff [L: mm] and it was (.) must have been really difﬁcult for her. [Lz awful]
I didn’t realise cos’ I was only small [Lz mm]

‘ KEYTERMS

   

Back channelling is particularly important in phone calls. Try not giving any
back-channelling in a phone call — the results may be uncomfortable!

I Discourse markers are words or phrases which mark boundaries between one I
bit of conversation and another where the speaker wishes to changes the subject:
so, right, I see, well, then, ﬁne. OK anyway. These can also be used to signal the
conclusion of a conversation, particularly where there are no other cues and
they are widely used in phone conversations. ]

I Non-standard features and forms of English are often used where a speaker
struggles to phrase utterances clearly. This is very common in speech. Do you
know what the end of your utterance will be when you start to speak? Speech
is full of constructions considered to be non—standard in writing. A common
non—ﬂuency feature is the lack of agreement between subject and verb (e.g. we
was really tired) or the incorrect use of tenses (e.g. so I sees him yesterday). Many
utterances are unﬁnished.

S: Are you stillplaying (.) er
L: guitar

159

I Tag questions occur at the end of a declarative utterance where the speaker adds
on a question to engage and elicit a response from the listener, for example It’s
hot in here, isn’t it? I’m havinga diﬁcult time, aren’t I? 
I Deixis refers to words which locate the conversation in a particular space or i
context which a non—participant would not be able to make sense of. This, that, ‘
these those are important in conversation as they are mutually understood
between the participants, for example we’ll move this over here or we’ll have one of
these with our coﬁee is only clear to those involved in the conversation at the time.

I Fixed expressions You will probably speak to many different people every
day and it is very difﬁcult to be creative throughout our conversational lives.
Therefore, some of what we say becomes routine and patterned, for example as
a matter offact, in my opinion, asfar as I can see, to be honest. These expressions
are usually known to those to whom we speak and so they have an important
function of maintaining a shared understanding of the culture around us. Some
of these ﬁxed expressions are colloquial and cliched (e.g. driving me mad, at the
end of the day, one fell swoop [from Shakespeare], an awesome time) but they
have the same function of conversational predictability and security which help
when we are faced with conversational overload.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

I Vague expressions can operate to soften authoritative requests and to maintain _
greater engagement between speakers. Look at the difference between can ya“
get me a cheese sandwich... and Can you get me a cheese sandwich or somethin
anything like that. Expressions such as sort of, kind of, around or so allow the
speaker some leeway and approximation of arrangements. Vague expressions
are not appropriate for travel details and other arrangements Where precise
information enables cooperation between speakers.

g/ -i

I Adverbs (adverbial phrases) are words and phrases which modify — add to _
adjectives. Both in written language and in speech, these words and phrases
work to convey the attitudes and values of the speaker and so they intensify
their feelings and opinions. Really, absolutely, literally, of coarse, extremely,
basically are frequently used to add strength and colour to our utterances

ACTIVITY 4.6

Read the following transcript and then write your own commentary on it,
including examples of the features you have identiﬁed.

Compare your ﬁnished commentary to the one following the transcript.
Consider:
I the role of each participant in planning the trip

I the extent to which each participant supports or counteracts the
suggestions of the other two

I clues to the relationship/extent of understanding between the participants
5 including their mutual understanding of the topic

I speciﬁc discourse features.

Context andparticipants: Threefriends are planning a holiday by rail in Europe
M: male, F1:female, F2:female

M this website says (.) there’s a good rail service to Amsterdam and
F2 really  I wanna go  heard good stuif
FI I hear (2) um, nice trains, trains with 2 levels  good view

F2 great  let’s look at the cost for Amsterdam Brussels, (.) try Amsterdam
Paris (2) could be better

M Amsterdam Brussels it cost costs (4) 40 euros

F2 that’ quite a lot  for each, is it each

M each, cost 40 euros each we could try another time or maybe weekday
(2) could be cheaper

FI look on another travel site or something O we could compare  then//

F2 // if we looked at one site each then maybe we could see the going rates

for those train routes

M The only problem is if we do go by train is the hassle of ﬁnding the
right buses and coaches and//

F1 // nah ’cos the train stations’ll be in the city centres won’t they

F2 yeah that’ll be ﬁne.Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

 

When people are planning and discussing informally there is often

hesitation and repetition as ideas are developed. Speakers are thinking

as they are speaking so may fail to ﬁnish their utterances or be }
interrupted by someone with a more deﬁnite point of view. Speakers 1
often soften their utterances by using modal forms of verbs (eg. could,

might) as well as other words like maybe or quite, which prevent the

speaker from sounding too harsh and dogmatic when the project is a

collaborative one.

COMMENT

There is repetition of key lexical words; in the sample above, the
places and costs must be emphasised to move the conversation to
some sort of resolution so Amsterdam, Brussels, Paris as well as the
cost must be clariﬁed so that all speakers understand the stage of the
planning. It is only when personal experience or some other deﬁnite
knowledge exists, that the speakers can become more assertive. In the
‘ L extract above, the speaker knows that the train stations will be located
in the city centres but still adds a tag question to soften this declarative
utterance.
Other features of conversation are found here. The conversation
is amongst friends so the register is informal and colloquial: hassle
is appropriate to describe the potential problems as is ellipsis wanna
in this context and the speaker also feels sufﬁciently secure with her
friends to utter the dismissive and slightly scornful nah as she seems
certain of her facts. 151
The conversation is primarily transactional with the aim being to
book a train trip for the three friends in as economical and trouble-
free way as possible. Elision avoids repetition of places and travel,
which are understood, however the friends must keep to their equal
status by softening assertions and taking account of each others’ ideas.
Vague expressions soften the imperative (look on another travel site
or something) while the use of tag questions (stations’ll he in the city
centres  won’t they?) gives reassurance for the plans to be adopted.
The planners are all engaged in a collaborative activity with people
whom they know well and they are using conversational strategies in ‘
order to achieve the most beneﬁcial outcomes for the project and for §
the maintenance of their friendship.

Further practice

Read the following transcript between students and a teacher in an international
school.

I What is the purpose of this discourse?

I What discourse features are present and how to they enable the conversation to I
proceed? 3
lCambridge International A Level English Language

 

Context: a group of Year 11 international students have been reviewing material
on racism; they are about to start a shortpresentation. This transcript is the
opening section

Participants: Teacher, Austin, Ilham, Ialeelah.

TEACHER Thanks Ori and your group  some interesting points about
racism in the 19305  so now um  it must be your turn
Austin’s group  yes you were going after Ori and his group 
so what did you look at from these documents.(.) everyone to say
something please.

JALEELAH we found a picture of some white women with placards 
protesting in the 19503 (.) they looked like they were going
to town (.) all dressed up  but they were carrying pla.) cards
against integration (.) I think that’s amazing (.) you can’t tell a
book by its cover (.) they were really racist

ILHAM Then this document about mixed race  that’s so strange ‘cos I’m
mixed race..//

JALEELAH // me too  my mum from Jamaica and my dad from Bangladesh

ILHAM [laughs] well I’m mixed mixed race (.) both my parents are mixed
race (.) erm (.) my mum’s half Saudi and half Egyptian and my
dad’s parents came from  Kuwait and Cbtar  that would

162 count  yes

AUSTIN I’m not mixed but my mum and dad are from Belize then we
lived in the States for a while and now they’re teaching in

Uganda (.) I’m just mixed

TEACHER what an amazing mix  how much have times changed for the
better and you are all together  so what else did you ﬁnd?

Speech strategies

The earlier sections of this unit have outlined the characteristics of discourse
analysis which are the recognisable ways in which we converse with each other.
What we say is a reﬂection of how we relate to the people and situations around
us and how we feel about ourselves in the dynamic world of social interactions.
In doing so, we are engaged both in semantics, a study of the meaning of words
and sentences and also, very importantly, pragmatics, the analysis of the context
in which we speak. This will be developed with more examples in Unit 5: Spoken
language and social groups.
The fact that we all engage in conversation does not necessarily makes us good
at it, even though we generally get plenty of practice! And when conversational
rules are not followed, comic and often embarrassing situations can occur.

 

You will ﬁnd out more in Unit 5 about the part played In spoken language by factors
such as politeness, status, naming and gender.

\WY TERMS

 

 

Maxims of quantity

1 Make your contribution to
the conversation as
informative as necessary.
Do not make your
contribution to the
conversation more
informative than necessary.

Maxim of relation
1 Be relevant.

Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

TIP

You will find it helpful to collect examples of dialogue and of unscripted and
scripted speech.

As ethically as possible, try to listen to a variety of conversations between
different groups of people then draw some conclusions about the content and
style ofthe dialogue, the tone and speed as well as the body language of the
participants.

Make a list of situations for scripted dialogue, perhaps speeches or play scripts,
and find some examples. Analyse these to draw conclusions about differences and
style.

 

Conversational maxims

Whenever you speak, you intend to make sense to your listeners according to the
rules and conventions of the language and you may have any number of purposes
in speaking. You may wish to inform, question, greet, perform, gossip and many
more but all of these conditions have conventions to which you should adhere.
Underlying all of the various forms is the cooperative principle. Hearing may not
quite be the same as listening. You have probably experienced a situation where
What you said has not been received in quite the way that you intended.

Grice’s Maxims (Paul Grice, 1975) are guideline principles which are generally
adopted in conversation. These are maxims and not rules since they are broken in
almost every conversation but they do provide a general framework for managing
conversation.

Maxims of quality
1 Do not say what you believe
to be false.
2 Do not say that for which you
lack adequate evidence.
Grice’s
maxims
Maxims of manner
1 Avoid obscurity of expression.
2 Avoid ambiguity.
3 Be brief— don’t ramble.
4 Be orderly.

 

ACTIVITY 4.7

1 Discuss each of Grice’s Maxims and how it is used in conversation.
Are there other maxims you think should be included? Justify your
opinion.

3 Listen to conversations or watch unscripted ones online. Analyse closely

where the maxims are followed and where they are not. What are the
results when they are not followed?

163Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Raj and Amy in conversation in The
Big Bang Theory.

 

conversational face the image
that a person has ofthemseives
as a conversationalist

face-threatening acts acts or
words which appear to threaten
the self—esteem of a speaker in
conversation

positive politeness strategies
intended to minimise the threat
to the hearer’s self—esteem

\ 7

ACTIVITY 4.8

In a group, select different comedy clips based on conversational
dysfunctions. Analyse in what ways the conversation is not working well and

why this has come about. To what extent does the confusion and breakdown
result from ﬂouting Grice’s Maxims?

Note: You may ﬁnd that some older comedy shows have content that
would be considered racist, sexist or politically incorrect today.

Central to the overarching principle of conversational cooperation is the notion
of m3}versattonai  which is each speaker’s sense of his or her own linguistic
image and worth. Potentially every conversation could impose upon and even

threaten this sense of face making speakers feel intimidated, ignored or ridiculed
rather than supported and included.

Strategies to manage {agate iéareatezgir,
situations. Speakers may use  paiitmess by being complimentary to the
person they are speaking to before starting a potentially face—threatening act. Such
strategies are used to make the hearer feel good about himself, his interests or
possessions, and are most usually used in situations where the speakers know each ‘
other fairly well, for example You look great/sad, can I help? Would you be so kind iUnit 4: Text and discourse analysis

as to pass me the sugar? Alternatively negative politeness may be used to mitigate a
request or situation which they wish to impose, for example You wouldn’t be able to

pass me the sugar, would you? In both of these circumstances the speaker hopes the
hearer will comply with their request. Here are some other examples:

I I’m terribly sorry but 

I Wouldyou mind ifI askedyou t0  ?
I Couldyou perhaps  ?

Disagreements are an inevitable part of discourse and the management of
differences of opinion is closely related to face—saving strategies. It is very
interesting to observe that when people want to disagree, the word no is less often
used than yes but. Why might that approach be more successful? The adversative

conjunction but qualiﬁes or changes what has just been said in some way; however
and not exactly operate in the same way.

A very important feature in any conversation is the relative status of the
participants and this topic will be explored further in the next unit. For now,
you should be aware that in all manner of formal and informal situations,

conversational success is more likely where strategies are employed which take
account of the relative status of each participant.

ACTIVITY 4.9

1 Discuss what strategies have been used in the following utterances and
consider their likely success in achieving their goal.

I Excuse me sir, would you mind moving up a little so that I can have a
seat?

I Couldyou please shut the windowjust afraction? It seems quite chilly in
here.

I Please may I borrow your pen?
I Can you tell me the time?

I You haven’t got $2 I could borrow have you? I ’11 pay you back
tomorrow.

I Please be quiet — the baby has just gone to sleep.

I Silence in the library.

I The management requires all employees to wear hard hats.

2 Discuss what positive and negative strategies to save conversational face
are used in your own culture. Which do you feel are most effective and
why?

3 Read the transcription below and discuss the strategies used. Include

a discussion of Grice’s maxims and the extent to which they have been
followed or broken.

Write a commentary on the conversation, based on your discussion.

Then compare your commentary to the one provided below the

transcript. Did you pick up on some of the same points, or suggest any
different ones?

165Cambridge International A Level English Language

   
  
  

e\\\~ ‘K‘x ‘

  
 

///I ‘ "“

~-

g. _ . U/ 0‘“
. “ . mm "" N
////u \xxw/m AV‘MV
/
\4“

up“ LU.

‘ / (I: ///I//\\\\/[//,- \\\‘.\
V] "A [[L\\\\// ‘ \\\\\

 

Context andparticipants: two women (V and M) on a country walk using a
publicfootpath which crosses aﬁeld. They are goodfrz'ends.

V there’s cattle over there O I don’t like cattle (3) they’re running towards
us//

M // right, right

V we can’t run back  it’s too far

V, M // what are we gonna do  what are we gonna do
V they’re still coming

M we’ll go through there

V quick quick

M let’s get out their way (.) get over here we’ve got to get somewhere we they
can’t get us (.) get in here they can’t get us

[They run 2‘0 u cattlepen und [linen over ﬂee meta/ﬂaming]
V they’re coming through (.) they’re still coming after us
M oh no they’re all around us
V what we gonna do
M we’ll wait til they lose interest
V we could be here all night

[14! flyispoinz‘ t/Je ruffle nave surrounded z‘bepen and are snorting undpuwz’ng
f/ye ground]

ﬂ

\\Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

 

V (5) we’re in their feeding pen they’re not going to go away (5)
M oh no (2) yeah you’re right
V we’re going to be in here for hours. what can we do

[V looks around and notices portaole plastic feeding iroug/Jsjust outside the
pen] (5)
V if we could ﬁnd some feed (3)
M yeah yeah  brill 

[V sees cooerea’plasz‘it barrels, they [iﬂ the [id and sears/.7 through plastic [zags in
the bins]

M oh no they’re empty//

V no no just a minute hang on there’s something there’s something there’s ‘
some in this one

M brill brill I’ll get the troughs (4) yuk they’re full of water [empties Man] J i
(3) we’ll have to be quick we’ll need to ﬁll them and be ready to get out 
before they’ve ﬁnished

[M £9” Vshooel bunch”qu of ﬂed into two oft/ye troughs]  1
V [giggling] I can’t believe we’re doing this  this is ridiculous

M we’ll need to make it difﬁcult for them  we need some time to get
out before they’ve ﬁnished eating (2) how much do cattle eat (2) is that 15-,
enough (.) we need to put a bit more in

I The two women are close friends and are also in a situation that they
ﬁnd threatening so their conversation is unlikely to be carefully
thought out. They are responding to the situation with colloquial
language (e.g. hang on, yuk).

COMMENT

I Conversational features include those transmitting the information
in the most direct way possible: elision (you ready), ellipsis (gonna),
deixis (here push it through), repetition (right, right), ﬁxed expressions
(hang on). Much of the conversation is in the form of adjacency pairs
(Is that right/yeah) and these adjacency pairs are most frequently in
the form of commands and instructions (push it through).

I The situation of perceived danger develops rapidly and so the maxim
of relevance is paramount. The attempts to get away from the cattle
means that the maxims of quantity and relation are followed as the
participants assess the situation and make attempts to repair it in a
focused and direct way. The maxim of quality is hampered by the I
uncertainty of the situation and its ramiﬁcations so that the speakers  '
do not know whether what they are saying is the truth and this is
reﬂected in different suggestions for escape. The maxim of manner
is followed as the situation is alternately a tense yet laughable one
requiring swift action to remedy.

I The conversational face of each speaker does not appear to be
threatened, most probably because the status of the pair is equal inCambridge International A Level English Language

 

   
  

r illustratetgheéli
, airspeeeh 

 

You will ﬁnd more aboutthe
study ofspeech sounds in child
language acquisition in Unit 7
on page 252.

 

  
 

every way; they are good friends, so an interchange of ideas is perfectly
acceptable as both are facing a common problem which neither has
faced before. Thus the politeness strategies are much less important
than the overriding common need to escape from the cattle pen — a
perfect example of the cooperative nature of conversation.

Transcribing speech

By now you will have become aware that speech is not governed by the same rules
as writing. This also applies to the transcription or writing down of speech, which
‘freezes’ the words spoken as well as the pauses. Phonetic transcripts are able to
record the sounds of a speaker according to a standard set of phonemes (sounds)
and some transcripts also record intonation. Phonetic transcripts are a time—
consuming but precise method of writing down spoken language.

Transcripts do not follow the normal conventions of writing so few punctuation
marks are used: speech marks are never used and other punctuation marks are
used only sparingly — primarily where confusion of meaning could occur.

Phonetics

Phonetics is the study of speech sounds. Although language is obviously composed
of sound, speech sounds came to be the main focus of linguistic investigation only
in the 20th century. Before that, linguists were more interested in written language.
Now linguists realise that studying the sounds of language helps to give a much
more precise analysis of accents, especially in the way that they change in different
conversational contexts. Sounds are also important in the study of child language
acquisition.

Symbols used in transcribing speech

The symbols used in speech transcription aim to recreate the manner in which
speech is delivered. We pause naturally to take a breath — these are called
micropauses — between each group of words, known as tone units. Transcripts
may sometimes indicate rising and falling intonation. In each tone unit, the pitch
movement (a rise or fall in tone, or a combination of the two) takes place on the
most important syllable known as the tonic—syllable. The tonic-syllable is usually a
signiﬁcant word, near the end of the tone unit.

As a general rule, the tone falls when we come to the end of a statement, for
example He left atfour o’clock; and it rises when we are uncertain or are asking a
question, for example Did she really ask for a pay rise? Antipodean speech patterns
generally have a rise in tone at the end of an utterance, not only in questions. This
has now spread across the globe, with the inﬂuence of the worldwide transmission
of Australian and New Zealand TV ‘soaps’.

  

TIP

When analysing speech transcripts, it is important to establish the topic, audience
and purpose of the extract, as this will help you understand the tone and the
dynamics ofthe discourse.Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

 

 

You may find it helpful to refer
back to this glossary when
analysing other examples of
transcribed speech in this unit
(see pages 156,162,166).

You will be learning more about intonation patterns in the section on Parol/nguistic
features on page 170‘

Glossary of speech annotations

Annotation Indicates 

speakers start at the same time

the length of a pause in seconds, for example She would be
about (2) ten Ishoula’ think

may be used to indicate a stressed word or syllable

square brackets usually contain information about
paralinguistic features, with the feature written in italics,
for example [laughs]

underlined

 

ACTIVITY 4.10

Read the following transcript of a short conversation between two coach
drivers. This records the actual delivery of words, tone units and pauses.
As preparation for the next section on the way in which conversations are

4 spoken, discuss what might be the tone of the two drivers while they are

stuck on the road with irritated passengers wanting to get to the airport
on time. I

Context and participants: two London coach drivers are discussing the traﬁ‘ic
congestion on the road ahead and their working conditions. Driver 1 (D1 ) has
just started driving the has towards one of the London airports. He has taken
overfrom Driver 2 (D2) who is now on his rest break and sitting in a passenger
seat alongside hisfriend — the current driver.

DI glad you made it now

D2 we was only 3 minutes late (.) two passengers worrying they will miss

their ﬂights

DI depends on this traﬂﬁc  always road works here  why do they do it at
peak trafﬁc  same every day

D2 they’ve been testing these lights for months (.) dreadful trafﬁc (.)
congestion every day (.) been a helluva day(.) you’re pushed to get to
Heathrow [London’s major airport] even when there’s nothing on the road

DI I’m on till 11

169Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

D2 helluva duty  long hours 
DI change for me  I’m normally on overnights  do a fast one E
E

D2 it should have been Terry on this but he’s on holiday  leaves me doing
5am on the trot for 6 days

DI I’ve got 4 overnights and another Monday (.) he’s desperate for a driver
to do//

D2 // no drivers want to do this trip (1) a nightmare

Paralinguistic features

As an accomplished conversationalist you will know that what you say is only half
the story; it is the way that you say it which is often key to the effectiveness of your
communication with others.

Body language, gestures, facial expressions, tone, speed and pitch of voice are
all examples of the paralinguistic features which add to the meaning of the total
discourse, even if the speakers are not consciously aware of them. When one or
more of these features is absent, as in a phone conversation, it is often difﬁcult to
interpret the speaker’s intentions. The main features of spoken discourse are as
follows:

I Tone relates to the emotion associated with the utterance; you can generally tell
whether someone is irritated, happy, sad or bored by the expression they use
when speaking

I Pitch is a musical term and, in language, relates to the level of voice
production, whether it is high or low. We squeal in a high pitch and younger
children also have high-pitched voices. Characteristically, when we speak
to babies we raise the pitch of our voices. Pitch is closely associated with the
sounds we make.

 

I Volume is the level of voice production, whether loud or soft. Everyone has
their own characteristic volume level when they speak, and volume may change
according to the circumstances.

 

You will learn about individual

Speaking Style m Unit 5 in the I Speed relates to the pace at which someone speaks and again this is related to
section about idiolect on pages the circumstances of the social interaction. When excited or frightened, we may
211~218. speak faster. Conversely, when we are uncertain, or wish to be very careful about

what we are saying, we tend to speak more slowly.Unit 4: Text and discourse analysis

 

ACTIVITY 4.11 y  f

1 On what occasions might we speak with a low-pitched voice?

Consider the circumstances which make people raise or lower the volume
of their voice when they speak. What social signals are sent by the volume i
of someone’s voice? ‘

3 To appreciate the importance of paralinguistic features, try holding a
conversation with someone else in your class, breaking conversational
conventions as follows:

I avoid eye contact with the person you are speaking to

I show no emotion in your facial expressions when you are speaking — ‘
no smiles or frowns ’

I do not change the tone of your voice — speak in a monotone

do not match the tone of your voice with what you are saying, for
example try saying how much you have enjoyed something in a very
ﬂat tone

I change the pace at which you speak — faster, slower.

i

1
Discuss in a group how you felt about breaking these paralinguistic features 1
of conversation and how your actions affected the hearer’s responses. Make an ‘
assessment, with evidence, about the importance of paralinguistic features in
discourse. f

on FURTHER aesaAnc

Carry out your own observations of paralinguistic features and their importance in
everyday conversation. ‘

I Observe facial expressions which accompany what other people are saying. Look
at how your teacher instructs and advises you. How do their facial expressions
differ from those of your friends when you are discussing something you plan to do
together?

I Observe body language that people around you use in conversation. Observe
people’s stance, use and positioning oftheir hands and arms. How far away
do people stand from each other? What is the difference between friendly and
threatening body language?

I Body language, and what it signifies, may vary according to the culture you live in.
First of ali, analyse the generally understood body language ofyour own culture,
for example handshakes, waving, making a fist. Then, if possible, investigate body
language from cultures other than your own and identify any significant differences
between them.

I Listen to the tone, pitch and pace of people speaking and assess how important
these features are and what effect they have on what is being said.

I Watch adverts and assess how paralinguistic features are used to persuade you to
buy goods and services. a:

171