‘0

Unit 7: Child language acquisition

a FURTHER REVSWEARCH

  

Language skills of children aged five to seven
I

At this stage, children are good at speaking and expressing requests and ideas
using connectives (words which join clauses giving additional information and
reasons, e.g. because, as); these words give the linguistic freedom to express
opinions and ideas.

The beginnings of reading and writing broaden the exposure to language so that
children understand the different meanings of a word and the context in which
each meaning is used.

Vocabulary extension includes the understanding that different words can have

similar meanings (e.g. unhappy/sad).

Children begin to understand that words can be used both literally and in more 265

imaginative ways; the child’s imagination is developing with story reading and

, creative writing.
Children are able to use language for different purposes as they begin to speak
more ﬂuently; it is possible to have a sustained conversation with a ﬁve—year—old
though most of it may relate to themselves and their own world.

ACTIVITY 7.7

1 Read the extract of a conversation in which ﬁve—year-old Ethan talks
about what he will let his own children do. Use this as a template to assess
conversational features of children of this age. If possible, use an example
of your own or from your own region.

2 Transcribe an extract from a conversation with a child aged between
ﬁve and seven. You could search for an example online, or provide your
own example. Write an accompanying commentary, using the example
provided as a model.

MOTHER Ethan (.) what did you just tell me you were going to do when
you grow up and have your own children

ETHAN I would let (.) whenever they want to do a paint craft (.) they
could paint on the walls

MOTHER the walls of your houseCambridge lnternationalA Level English Language

 

ETHAN aha
MOTHER any craft they want
ETHAN yep
MOTHER what else could they do to the walls if they want to
ETHAN (1) errm  they can write words for me 
MOTHER that wouldn’t bother you  any wall in the house  not just
the basement 
ETHAN that would be ﬁne
MOTHER and in your bedroom
ETHAN no I wouldn’t allow them in my bedroom  but downstairs in
the basement  or in their room (.) they could do it in their
room 0 if they wanted
MOTHER what kind of food would you feed your children
ETHAN (3) every child could have a different meal  I would let them
pick out whatever they want to  and I would  .. unclear] let
it cook its own dinner 
MOTHER when would be their own bedtime
ETHAN (4) probably about ten o’clock
MOTHER don’t you think that’s a little late
ETHAN (2) no  cos I’d let ’em play  cos they would probably want
to play  at night time  so I would let ’em  if they play 
towards 10 O’clock
'—
E This is only part Of an extended conversation that Ethan is having at
g home and where he is being asked to think hypothetically about his
8 own future. He is conﬁdent in his answers which, although clearly

unrealistic, are nonetheless clearly expressed and in some detail as when
he is talking about allowing his children to draw on the walls. He is
expressing his views in full utterances (that would be ﬁne).

He gives reasons for his decisions (I ’d let ’em play (.) cos they would
probably want to play) and here too he is able to consider likelihood or
possibilities shown in the use of the conditional tense (they could paint
on the walls).

Ethan’s vocabulary is varied and he is able to embellish ideas with
examples such as the different rooms of the house tO be used (room,
bedroom and basement). He uses a modifying adjective to explain his
points (dz'ﬁerent meal) and an adverb of time to add detail (whenever
they want).

He is competent with the rather tricky practice in English of changing
the singular every child into the plural pronoun their although interestingly
he makes the Virtuous error of changing the child into the neuter it.

(3Unit 7: Child language acquisition

 

6’05 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Ethan is at ease with the conversational conventions of turn—taking
and is direct in disagreeing about the lateness of bedtime; he does not

attempt to use any face—saving strategy. He is dealing with a projected
future very much in terms of his own life now.

Language skills of children aged seven to eleven

A whole set of development milestones occur around the age of seven and this
applies to language too.

Children of this age speak ﬂuently with a wide vocabulary of several thousand
words. Their language efforts at this time are mainly directed towards reading and
writing, which unlike speaking, are usually taught in formal education. There are a
number of theories about the most effective way of teaching these skills.

Speaking skills continue to develop with a mastery of humour and play on
words, which are speciﬁc to the native language(s). The child will almost inevitably
be involved in arguments and must develop language strategies to manage these,
difﬁcult though this is.

Children are still very self-oriented but increasingly look outwards; they are
becoming aware that different styles of language are used according to the people
and situations they encounter. Their grasp of abstract issues (ideas about what
is good and bad and other ethical issues) must all be expressed through their
language. Their spoken language may be guided at school and they will have lessons
to gain more competence in their native language(s).

Many children are brought up to be bilingual; you may be one of them. This
includes children of parents who speak different native languages and transmit

' this to their children, as well as children who speak one language in the home and

another outside. The value of speaking more than one language is becoming more
widely recognised in our globalised society.

ACTIVITY 7.8

The following are all major tasks. If p0ssible, and where agreed with your
teacher, you may prefer to work with a classmate or in a group.

1 Construct a questionnaire and then interviewa range of children and
teenagers. If possible, interview a mixture of monolingual and bilingual
speakers to assess their views on the advantages and disadvantages of
bilingual speaking.

2 Access a reading scheme and evaluate the sequence of language used for
learning to read. If possible, speak to someone who teaches children to
read and write to ﬁnd out their views on the most effective strategies for
learning these skills. '

3 Where ethically possible, obtain examples of children’searly writing to
see the content and structure of the. work. Examine, spelling patterns,
including any words which emergent writers-ﬁnd ditﬁéult. '

4 Where ethically possible, listen to emergent readers in your‘native
language. Examine the way they approach unfamiliar WOrds‘ and whether
there is a consistent pattern in the difficulties they experience.

267Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

 

For more about language and
social groups, turn to page 174
in Unit 5.

 

 

For more about code switching,
turn to page 187 in Unit 5.

Teenage language

As teenagers you may think you receive a very bad press! The media seem happy
to represent teenagers as an inarticulate group who express themselves largely
through Facebook and who are chained to their cell phones using ‘text speak’_
This section offers a more balanced approach to the ways in which teenagers use
language.

Teenagers are often early adopters of popular culture; style, fashion, music,
new technology and language. Older people often criticise the language they hear
teenagers using but words they may have used themselves such as OK, blast and
groovy once raised eyebrows in the 19505 and 1960s for the same reason! Teenagers
are innovators of language and this is an important feature of their conversational
styles.

Teenagers are ﬂuent conversationalists. Having learned the conventions from
their earliest years, they are now able to bend and break these established patterns,
especially in conversation with their peers. Teenagers talk a lot! Their world is
bursting with activity which needs to be communicated and, in the digital age,
instantaneous transfer of this information is critical to them. Skype, Facebook,
FaceTime, phone, twitter, bbm, Snapchat, Whatsapp and Instagram are just some
of the methods of social networking which increasingly redeﬁne the boundaries
between written and spoken language. These forms of communication generate
language which may be unclear or even incomprehensible to those outside the
teenage circle.

A criticism of teenagers and their language use is that they may actually
reduce their lexical base from a vocabulary of several thousand words acquired in
childhood. Teenage language has often been associated with lowered standards,
as deﬁned by older generations who often fail to understand teenage use of patois.
Additionally, there is now the medium of the internet on which teenagers may
share different language styles which were not available to their parents and
grandparents.

Teenage language acquisition is clearly not about learning language, but it is
about learning to adapt and use language in situations where they are beginning
to play adult roles in society and for which clear communication is essential.
Teenagers, more than adults, may live in contrasting language worlds. Online
digital communication and behaviour is immediate; it is generated by the user j
themselves, for example videos posted on YouTube. Teenagers can create their 
own virtual lives with games and activities that they themselves choose and l
control. These online activities invariably have their own vocabulary which is
understood by the participants. Online teenage gaming advertisements encourage
teenagers to create your own avatar or baildyoar own medieval kingdom while you
chat and hang out with friends. Investigation into such games shows that there
is a lot of jargon and colloquial phrasing, sometimes leading to bad or abusive
language.

By contrast, the style of traditional education, which takes up more and
more of the teenage years, may demand more standard English usage. Successful K
students have to demonstrate that they are able to write and express themselves 
appropriately. The majority of teenagers successfully code switch between different I
language styles, but it is those who cannot switch, and are therefore perceived as
inarticulate, who become the object of negative media attention.Unit 7: Child language acquisition

ACTIVITY 7.9

1 Think about your own personal communications. What digital forms of
communication do you use? With whom do you communicate and how
frequently?

2 To what extent do you code switch when you move from digital
conversations with your peer group to communication with the broader
community, such as older family members, teachers and employers?
Analyse the type of vocabulary and syntactical changes you make, and the
reasons why.

3 One online blogger has said that:

Daily, teens confront the challenges and opportunities of code switching in
digital spaces, at home and at school. Code switching is not easy to do and can
bring coping fatigue, confusion, missteps and distractions.

afsusa via flickr

Discuss this statement with classmates and consider whether it is a fair
assertion of the difﬁculties teenagers face today.

4 Analyse a range of magazines aimed at both male and female teenagers,
and TV programmes and ﬁlms where teenagers are featured, both from
your local area and from other countries. What forms of language are
prominent? Is the language used in the magazines similar to your own
style of speaking? To what extent do teenagers code switch from standard
forms of English to teenage colloquial language?

Here are four transcripts of conversations demonstrating teenagers using both
appropriate and inappropriate forms of language in order to speak in public.

Transcript 1

Teenagers in a classroom are discussing the ethics ofanimal testing as part ofan
exam assessment.

TOM We’re goin’ to start to discuss animal testing

PETE um  I reckon that animal testing is wrong (.) because (.) it only
harms a few animals but it um (.) saves a large percentage of
humans

LEILA I’d like to argue against that because it doesn’t always save humans

lives  because some products that are tested on animals are in the
name of vanity because  they’re like beauty products which are
unnecessary really so (.) would you really kill an anim—/ an animal
for a beauty product ’cos I wouldn’t 

TOM um (.) we also think it’s important to do animal testing because
(1) there’s been instances in the past where large numbers of
humans were about to die from an illness or a disease  and
some animals have been harmed in animal testing but it’s resulted
in hundreds and thousands of people being saved from that
particular disease

 

269Cambridge International A Level English Language

SHANNON but who says (.) um that they can test a product on an animal an>
it’s ﬁne on them and then  then  they test it on a human and it

kills them or  //
LEILA // yeah because they’ve got different DNA so (1) if it’s ok with an

animal 0 it might not always be all right on a human//
TOM well life’s about survival of the ﬁttest  and it’s in the best

interest to test it on an animal not knowing if it’s the right thing

to do

www.youtube.com

Transcript 2

Thefollowing conversation involves a teenage girl and her maths teacher in a
classroom in Essex, near London.

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

STUDENT

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

STUDENT

MATHS TEACHER

What is pi 0 where did it come from O sir who made
up pi
I told you last lesson where it came from

I don’t really pay attention [snapspen]

you were going to do some practice questions on area of a
sector

Fun fun fun [/aams and [aag/ys]

it’s not funny  you’re here to work, you’re here to learn
maths yeah

 unclear]
I don’t care
00h err

it’s taken you nearly ﬁve minutes to open a book  come
on

[makesﬂzce at teacher]

[voiceover] When I’m messing around I don’t really know
I’m messing around till I get into an argument with a
teacher or somethin’ like that but I do actually wanna get
good grades and that and listen

how many questions of those four have you tried

the date

none. my (1) problem with some people in the class is
that they don’t seem to remember stuﬂr  so you need
to remember the area of the circle formula and the
circumference of the circle formula

Educating Essex, TV programme
6

\,

 

t 5H...A.u_‘—-.ammgﬂthM-Airgs‘vLA—naim ‘ . - AUnit 7: Child language acquisition

Transcript 3
An extract from Malala Yousafzai’s speech at the United Nations. Malala was shot
in the head by the Taliban in Pakistan for championing girls’ rights to education.

Dear Friends, on the 9th of October 2012, the Taliban shot me on the left side
of my forehead. They shot my friends too. They thought that the bullets would
silence us. But they failed. And then, out of that silence, came thousands of voices.
The terrorists thought that they would change our aims and stop our ambitions
but nothing changed in my life except this: weakness, fear and hopelessness died.
Strength, power and courage was born. I am the same Malala. My ambitions are
the same. My hopes are the same. My dreams are the same.

Dear sisters and brothers, I am not against anyone. Neither am I here to
speak in terms of personal revenge against the Taliban or any other terrorist
group. I am here to speak up for the right of education of every child. I want
education for the sons and the daughters of all the extremists especially the
Taliban.

I do not even hate the Talib who shot me. Even if there is a gun in my hand
and he stands in front of me. I would not shoot him. This is the compassion
that I have learnt from Muhammad — the prophet of mercy, Jesus Christ and
Lord Buddha. This is the legacy of change that I have inherited from Martin
Luther King, Nelson Mandela and Muhammad Ali Jinnah. This is the
philosophy of non—Violence that I have learnt from Gandhi Jee, Bacha Khan and
Mother Teresa. And this is the forgiveness that I have learnt from my mother
and father. This is what my soul is telling me, be peaceful and love everyone.

Dear sisters and brothers, we realise the importance of light when we see
darkness. We realise the importance of our voice when we are silenced. In
the same way, when we were in Swat, the north of Pakistan, we realised the
importance of pens and books when we saw the guns. ‘

Transcript 4
An interview with an American teenage competitionﬁnalist.

INTERVIEWER Recent polls have shown a ﬁfth of Americans can’t locate
the United States on a world map. Why do you think this
is?

TEENAGER I personally believe the US. Americans are unable to do so

because, uh, some, uh (.) peOple out there in our nation
don’t have maps, and, uh, I believe that our education like
such as South Africa and, uh, the Iraq everywhere like,
such as and  I believe that they should, our education
over here in the US. should help the US, err, uh, should
help South Africa and should help the Iraq and the Asian

countries, so we will be able to build up our future.

www.youtube.com

 

 

271Cambridge International A Level English Language

ACTIVITY 7.10

1 Read the transcripts and evaluate, with evidence, the extent to which

the teenagers are able to use an appropriate register of language for the

situation.

Source your own examples of teenage speech from your local area and,
using the same criterion, assess whether teenagers have the ability to code

switch.

How is teenage slang developing?

 

For more about slang, turn to
page 195 in Unit 5.

In Unit 5 you learned about slang and how this form of language is undergoing
constant and rapid change with new forms emerging and words appearing and
falling out of use. Particular forms of slang are used by teenagers and teenage slang
can be a very lively form of expression!

Read this news article about recent developments in new forms of slang used
amongst multi—ethnic teenagers in London.

 

From the mouths of teens

A ‘perfect storm’ of conditions has seen
teen slang from inner—city London
spread across the country. But Where
does this new language originate
from? And, if you can’t stop kids from
speaking it, is there any way to decipher
What the words mean?

At the back of a London bus, two
teenagers are engaged in animated
conversation. “Safe, man,” says one.
“Dis my yard. It’s, laak, nang, innit?

What endz you from? You’re looking
buff in them 10W batties.”

“Check the creps,” says the other.
“My bluds say the girls round here are
nuff deep.”

“Wasteman,” responds the ﬁrst,
with alacrity. “You just begging now.”
The pair exit the vehicle, to blank
stares of incomprehension. Later, this
dialogue is related to Gus, a 13—year—
old Who attends an inner London

comprehensive; he wastes no time in
decoding it.

"Safe just means hi,” he says briskly.
“Your yard is like your home, Where
you’re from. Nang just means good.
Your endz is your neighbourhood.
Buff is, like, attractive. Low batties are
trousers that hang really low on your
waist. Creps are trainers. Bluds are
your mates. Nuff means very. Deep
is the same as harsh or out of order.

«Hm. imwmwwnmumwvwm, W"~”‘W\PXM»W.W. vmvm-A

 

"and Magma; ’