Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

ACTIVITY 1.43

1 Find examples of the following techniques in the extract:

I the sense of endless boredom conveyed by the present tense
I how the writer uses certain phrases and adjectives (like tedious) and
verbs (such as soldier on) and what this expresses
I how he vocalises his inner thoughts through a series of questions.
2 Now write a paragraph explaining what you think the effect of the writer
using the third person is. What does Coetzee achieve through this? (Think

about when in his life he might have actually written this account and also
about the dual perspective of narrator and ‘character’.)

Further practice

Look at the ﬁnal two paragraphs of the extract and the ways in which it starts to
draw on more descriptive language.

Dialogue and action
When writers focus descriptions on other people, they can reveal as much about
themselves as the people they present. Dialogue, is of course, a key signal of
character and behaviour. Writers do not use dialogue as ‘ﬁller’ but to convey
important ideas about people or, in narratives, to forward the plot/action.

For example, in the following extract the writer visits her apparently high—
achieving sister and her family. Through the dialogue, and what happens around it,
a number of things emerge about the narrator.

x KEY TRMS

    

 

 

When I arrived at my sister’s new home, she was still at
work. I was greeted at the door by my 7—year-old niece,
Sophie, still recovering from a cold, and the nanny
who, I later found out, makes more money than I do.

“Aunt Tobin, come see my room!” said Sophie,
grabbing my hand and pulling me up the stairs to her
room, which was bright, clean, organized.

“It’s amazing,” I said with a tinge of sadness she’s
too young to have noticed.

Sophie continued the tour around the home — not
ostentatious or a mansion, by any stretch, but big
and two stories and beautiful. She took me into my
sister’s room, a gigantic spread with a king—size bed
and large ﬂat-screen TV hanging above a ﬁreplace. Her
bathroom has two sinks, the biggest bathtub I’ve ever
seen, marble counter tops, and makeup drawers that
stop short of the cabinet then slowly, quietly close on
their own, like the trunk lids on fancy cars...

The morning after I arrived in Los Angeles was
frenetic. The rustling began at 6 a.m., when my
brother-in-law got up to make the kids’ lunch.

“Can you wake up Sophie and make sure she gets
dressed?” my sister asked.

“Sure, no problem,” I said, needing to be useful
in some way, wanting to feel like a part of the family,
and hoping to disprove my sister’s conviction that I’m
wholly incapable of being functional before 10 a.m.

But my niece didn’t want to get out of bed.
Apparently, acquiescence costs $2.

On the drive to school, Sophie sat behind me,
elevated by a kid seat that I needed her help to install
in my manual-windows-only Kia rental. I was wearing
old jeans and the sweat shirt I’d slept in, trying and
failing to engage in a conversation through the rear—
View mirror. Then the Violent Femmes came on the
radio. “Kiss off,” I love that song, so I started singing,
hoping she’d appreciate the entertainment. 1 said one
one one canseyou left me /And two two twofor my
sorrow /And three three threefor my heartache 

“Stop!” said my niece. “You’re weird, Aunt Tobin.”

From My Sister’s PerfectLife by Tobin Levy.

47Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Read this commentary which focuses largely on the dialogue.

‘ KEYTERMS

    

At first the niece uses positive, inviting language which is in fact an
imperative without any sense of formal greeting, an indication that she
is at ease with her aunt. The enthusiasm and urgency of the invitation

is accompanied by the child’s instinctive grabbing and pulling which
suggest a sense of intimacy and an equal level of familiarity. The aunt’s
reply (It’s amazing) does not seem to mirrorthe initial enthusiasm ofthe
niece’s words; the absence of the exclamation mark in comparison to
Sophie’s greeting an indication of this sense of understatement or sense
of inferiority as the writer realises the kind of environment Sophie and
her family inhabit.

COMMENTARY

 

ACTIVITY 1.44

1 Discuss with a partner: _ I Why does the commentary draw attention to the
I Which character does the commentary focus on? 01111881011 0f the €XC1amati0n mark?
I What particular actions and spoken words 2 Now, working on your own, copy and complete this
does the commentary pick up on to explore the table which selects some other aspects of dialogue and
relationship? actions from the passage:

  
   
  
 
   
 
 
   

  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 

 
  
   

Quotation Comment/effect on how we view

narrator/Sophie

 
 
 
  
 
 
  

 

 

Mother’s words in morning echo
Sophie’s opening words '

“Come see my room.”
“Can you wake up Sophie ...”

Suggests both mother and daughter

are telling the compliant narrator what
to do

  
 
 

  
  
  
 

 

 

 

Sophie’s refusal to do what she’s told
at first

But my niece didn’t want to get out of
bed...

-W.mmwmaa a- .

 

Sophie helping her aunt to fix the car
seat

 
 
   

 

 

   

Sophie telling her aunt not to sin lmplies that...
g

 
 

3 Look at some of the other elements of the passage and 4 Finally, write a full commentary on the whole passage
make notes on: in answer to the following task:

I the PhYSical descriptmns 0fthe house and the How does the writer present her situation and

gadgets in it relationships in the passage through the style and
I the appearance and behaviour of the narrator language used?
herself

Include the notes you have made on all the aspects

I asides or apparently throwaway comments which you explored, including dialogue.

reveal something about the writer and her situation.

Humour and hyperbole

One of the key techniques writers use is to take a situation or experience and use
exaggerated language or ideas for effect. This device is often used by feature writers

in magazines or newspapers who reﬂect with an element of amusement upon their
own lives, or those of people they know well.

0Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

In the following extract, the writer uses a number of devices to paint a vivid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

portrait of his father. These include:

I anecdotal accounts — examples of things his father has said and done
I hyperbole — exaggerated images, descriptions or comparisons

 ~—~- '--~" I the use of a variety of tenses to convey past behaviour or experiences with his

father, and the current situation.

There is little description, if any, of his father’s physical appearance, other than his
voice. It is therefore important to understand how the writer is able to convey such
an effective portrait of his father.

ACTIVITY 1.45

Read the extract and make your usual list of key words and phrases, ready to
write up for a commentary on the style and language.

“Try not to overdo the exercise,” I tell my dad.

“I’M FINE,” he replies, loudly. “I’VE ALREADY
BEEN FOR A SEVEN MILE RUN, SWAM FORTY
LENGTHS AND CHOPPED A BIG LOAD OF
WOOD THIS MORNING.” I live over a hundred miles
from my parents, and I haven’t seen them since two
months ago, when my dad ﬁrst reignited his exercise
regime, but I already feel tired merely from hearing
about it. Could he not just do the same things in
moderation? I ask him.

I know from historical evidence that this is a
bit like trying to persuade a lion to ignore a gazelle
carcass and eat some tapas with a fork, but it has
become my job to worry.

He has been having violently energetic sporting
dreams again. This is a customary byproduct of the
punishing regimes of physical exercise he plunges
into every couple ofyears or so. “LAST NIGHT’S
ONE WAS ABOUT A WINNING HEADER IN A
FOOTBALL MATCH,” he told me. “I WOKE UP
ON THE FLOOR. I HIT THE BEDSIDE TABLE
ON THE WAY. I EMAILED THE BBC WEATHER
TEAM TO SAY THEY’RE RUBBISH AND
COULDN’T FORECAST THE DAYS OF THE
WEEK. THEY HAVEN’T GOT BACK TO ME.”

A few years ago, my dad successfully completed
a marathon in a superhero suit, seventeen months
Shy of his sixtieth birthday. During his warm-up for
this, his nocturnal adventures included another top
ﬂight football clash, which left him with a deep cut
011 his forehead (same bedside table) and a rugby
match which climaxed with him drop—kicking my
mum across the bed. After a slightly sedentary period,
he’s started exercising a lot again of late: running
Several miles a day and getting up at 6am to swim
Competitiver against his friend Malcolm.

As my dad reports incidents from his recent
athletic life to me, he will switch subjects mid—ﬂow,
Without pausing for breath. He might come back to
the original subject, but you never know for sure, or
at What point. “I LET THE POSTWOMAN FEEL
MY STOMACH TODAY,” he told me on the phone
yesterday. “SHE SAID IT WAS REALLY FLAT. I
RUN AROUND THE VILLAGE CRICKET PITCH
BECAUSE THEN YOUR MUM KNOWS THERE’S
ROOM FOR AN AIR AMBULANCE IF I HAVE A
HEART ATTACK.” >

He is the worst kind of Wing man to have as
a storyteller, constantly charging in and riding
roughshod over the crescendo of my mum’s gently
told anecdotes. “Mick,” she’ll say. “Who’s telling this
story?” But it has little effect. We’ve now almost cured
him of his habit of quietly picking up their second
telephone and adding his bellowing input to our
conversations at comically inopportune moments, but
a chat with him in the ﬂesh can leave you feeling spent
and dizzy.

My parents come from families of vastly
contrasting volumes: one excitable, one deferentially
quiet. Whereas my late nan — my mum’s mum —
tended to pick up the phone in the manner of a woman
who’d been hiding from an angry dragon for her entire
life and was worried it might have ﬁnally tracked her
down using the phonebook, my dad’s parents would
often bellow for several minutes into answer phones
before realising they weren’t speaking to a real human,
so accustomed were they to their voices drowning out
those of others. My grandma and granddad are gone
now, and my dad doesn’t have a similarly loud spouse,
or siblings, so he makes up for it by adding two or
three extra raucous conversations to every room
he’s in.

a

49Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

“THAT WAS THE OTHER THING ABOUT “BRILLIANT! IUSED TO MAKE GREAT DENS AS .3
MICK GALLAGHER FROM MY GANG IN THE A KID. SEE THAT SPEED CAMERA? IT’S FAKE.” g?
EARLY SIXTIES,” my dad — who, though still Of course, with all this exercising, the adrenaline 
some way from his dotage, has deﬁnitely reached his is pumping all the harder, and his storytelling even 1' v;
anecdotage — will explain. “HE LATER WENT OUT more enthusiastic and freeform. My mum claims my 
WITH THREE WOMEN. LOOK AT THE SIZE OF dad “doesn’t have an off switch” but I’m not sure that’s 
THAT BUZZARD! I DON’T LIKE THAT BLOKE strictly true. He can fall asleep instantly in pretty 
OFF GRAND DESIGNSl. HE OWNS TOO MANY much any environment, on any vaguely horizontal i
JACKET S.” surface. When he’s off, he’s completely off. It’s just that 

Being at the wheel of the car will not stem the ﬂow. when he’s on, he’s also completely on. He’s like a TV in 
“IMAGINE WHAT IT WOULD HAVE BEEN LIKE that sense: an old one, without the standby function. ‘I’

TO LIVE ON THAT FARM IN THE SEVENTEEN From Loud Dad by Tom COX‘ 
HUNDREDS,” he’ll say, slowmg down 1118 VW Golf. E ,

1 Grand Designs a UK television programme

ACTIVITY 1.46

Write a commentary on the style and language of the extract:

I Write a brief, focused introduction for the extract.

I Work through the extract in sections, looking for contrasts, differences
and similarities between them.

a I Use the words and phrases that have been highlighted as the basis for the

quotations commented on.
I Try not to assert ideas but use words like seems, appears and apparent.

I Don’t use excessive linguistic terminology or try to spot techniques and '
language features for their own sake.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Personal writing can take many forms and will contain elements of other types
of text.

A sense of ‘voice’ is central to personal writing.

Characterisation, whether of the writer or of the people they are describing, is
an important component of much personal writing.

I Exploring the use of a variety of tenses can provide insights into the writer’s
perspective.

Persuasive writing

In this section you will:
’ KEY TERMS

    

I read a range of persuasive texts

I explore some of their key features.

What is persuasive writing?
Persuasive writing can take many forms:

I reviews of cultural events or experiences such as plays or ﬁlms

I reviews of texts such as novels, poetry or non—ﬁction
@Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

feature articles in magazine or newspapers which tackle a particular issue or
topic

opinion pieces with a more direct and straightforward angle on a subject of
debate

letters in newspapers or other media.

The style and language of persuasive writing is driven by the form, the audience
and the stance of the writer. Some use highly emotive, charged language to create
maximum impact; others employ a more balanced tone, using measured argument
to make their point. Other writers might take an amused or slightly ironic
approach.

The conventions writers use in persuasive writing will therefore change

according to the tone they wish to strike. These might include:

loaded, emotive language (e.g. he gives an appallineg dull, wooden

performance)

rhetorical effects and devices, for example, rhetorical questions (e.g. Are we
really meant to believe so many men would fall for her?)

humour or ironic comment (e.g. The only chemistry between them was the hot

air they kept on speaking)

expanded noun phrases, especially in reviews (e.g. ‘He is the usual all-American
downtrodden fall-guv we all root for)

hyperbole, or exaggeration for comic, sarcastic or dramatic impact (e.g.

The music continues to rattle the lonely glassware. This is a very quiet

restaurant.) 51
direct appeal to the reader through a conversational tone, for example using

question tags or other informal forms (e.g. Yo_u’ll come out of the cinema

smiling, which can’t be a bad thing, can it?)

technical or specialist/subject—speciﬁc vocabulary that casts the writer as an
expert (e.g. The opening montage clearly shot on location in Turkey features a
roof-top chase which introduces our charismatic protagonist)

often, but not exclusively, expressed mainly in the present tense to describe the
immediate experience.

   

m I 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

A theatre review

Read the following text which describes the writer’s experience of watching a
particular show in a theatre.Taken on its own terms, however, my ﬁrst brush

with the show on stage (I saw the ﬁlm version with
Madonna) leaves little impression. Most of the
numbers blend together and the strongest melody is
reprised throughout beginning with “What A Circus,”
the famed peak “Don’t Cry For Me, Argentina” and the
ﬁnale. This unfolding of a melody throughout a show
can climax with a powerful “reveal” of the number.
Here it simply feels like leaning on a good tune too
often.

Still, this is a handsome production with a full
orchestra sounding marvelous. One can imagine a
hungry, attention—grabbing actress like Patti Lupone
making the most of the spotlight. Unfortunately, the
acclaimed actress Elena Roger can barely hold the
stage. Her voice is not remotely equipped for the part
and her stage presence is minimal. You look at the
spectacle of this Evita when you should be riveted on
Eva Peron herself. An entire nation prostrates itself at
her feet? You doubt they’d even notice her...

Evita should be a ﬁercely ambitious character as
embodied in her singing. But Roger’s voice is so thin
and small (she played Edith Piaf in another hit show
in London) that it simply disappears in the higher
register. You’re more worried for her than intimidated
or magnetized. Her best moments occur when she can
stay in that lower register and speak-sing a song, such
as the duet “I’d Be Surprisingly Good For You,” with
Cerveris. He, by the way, is a marvelous performer,
but paired with Roger and singing what is essentially

ACTIVITY 1.47

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

a dull and uninteresting role, even Cerveris can’t do
much. Also less demanding vocally (though during
this song she’s dancing quite a bit) is “Buenos Aires”
with Martin. He’s an amiable presence on stage albeit
with little of the ability to give Che the edginess and
cynicism the role desperately needs.

When it comes to that iconic number “Don’t Cry
For Me Argentina,” Roger simply makes you feel
nervous. It works better at the end when her frail
voice can be seen as in character, since Evita is dying
when she reprises the tune from her deathbed (where,
frankly, it makes more emotional sense than it does on
the balcony anyway). She’s especially exposed on “You
Must Love Me,” the ballad written for the ﬁlm which
she sings alone on a stage with Cerveris. Without sets
and dancing and other cast members to distract, you
have nothing to focus on but her unconvincing vocals.

Frankly, it’s difﬁcult to understand why she was
cast in London, much less here, where the standards
for musicals are and should be the highest in the world.
Roger unquestionably does not possess the pipes to
sing this part. Since this isn’t a dance show where
dancing might be the most important talent and she
certainly doesn’t act anyone off the stage, why would
her ability to—at best—get through the big numbers
rather than nail them be acceptable? The entire show
is built around what should be the ﬁery performance at
its heart, making this Evita very cool indeed...

‘Do Cry for Argentina’ by Michael Giltz,
from The Huffington Post.

Make brief notes on the following questions:

I What is the writer’s viewpoint on the Show?

I Which of the techniques or language features mentioned on page 51 can
be seen here? (Look particularly for examples of loaded language — either

positive or negative.)

 

Key technique: the expert View
One key feature of many reviews is the expert view. This can be seen in:

I ' specialist or technical terms which the writer is competent in using

I the perspective or viewpoint expressed (a conﬁdence that they know what
they’re talking about)

I references to other, similar texts, plays, etc.

Read the extended commentary opposite, which begins by commenting on this

aspect in particular.COMMENTARY

 

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

in the passage, the writer expresses his views by seeming to develop a
clear sense of voice, that of someone who is an expert, someone who
knows what should be expected as evidenced in the modal form (‘E_vit_a
should be... the strongest melodyris reprised throughout’) and appears
to further demonstrate that knowledge by offering some apparent
compliments(this is a handsome production with a full orchestra sounding
marvellous ... is a marvellous performer... the acclaimed actress  an
amiable presence on stage).

Yet, a number of direct statements (leaves little impression  it’s
difﬁcult to understand Why she was cast) leave no doubt about his real
opinion. indeed, an apparent compliment (This unfolding ofa melody
throughout a show can climax...) is sometimes undermined straight away
by such a direct statement — Here it simply feels like leaning on a good tune
too often — so that the syntax creates a rather downbeat tone with the
final words here suggesting a lack of effort on the production’s part.

The more forthright comments leave little doubt about the writer’s
true sentiments as he highlights the central performer, in particular,
as his target. She is described in negative terms and there is little
attempt to offer any apparent compliments as the reviewer draws on
contrasts between the expectations of the audience and the unexpected
experience they come across: where the lead character should be fiercely
ambitious the performer’s voice is so thin and small, suggesting a sense
of frailty and inadequacy symbolic of her entire performance and not
just her voice. A further contrast is used to suggest how low the reviewer
estimates her. He employs strong adjectives to describe one of her rivals
~ a hungry, attention-grabbing  Patti Lupone — conveying her sense of
passion and self-centred demands in comparison to the current star who
can barely hold the stage, the adverb implying her limitations and frailty
once more.

Other adverbs are also used by the writer, as if he is taking us into
his own private thoughts and opening up to us — he repeats the word
frankly as if reaching a decisive and revealing moment of recognition
and understanding about his feelings for the Show. Yet, there are some
occasions where he cannot hide his sense of voice, his rather sarcastic
tone, expressing his inner thoughts. He follows the rhetorical question
An entire nation prostrates itselfat her feet? a where he blurs the line
between the real Eva Peron who was adored by some of her followers
in her lifetime — with the actual actor playing her so that there is again
an answer which adds to the other aspects of the downbeat tone in the
article: You doubt they’d even notice her...

ACTIVITY 1.48

1

Which of the other features or techniques you picked up in the activity
opposite have been identiﬁed in the commentary?

Which have been missed, if any?

Whatkcomments are made in the commentary about the mood and
perspective of the reviewer?

 

53Cambridge International AS Level English Language

A film review

 

By reading other reviews for different art forms, you can begin to pick up on
common conventions that they share, whilst at the same time beginning to
appreciate the distinctive voice of individual critics.

ACTIVITY 1.49

Read this extract from a review of a different art form — a ﬁlm about Princess
Diana. Begin by listing key words and phrases, preparing to comment on the
kinds of techniques and effects the writer employs to express her opinions

about the ﬁlm.

What was Naomi Watts thinking? No sooner has she
landed her second Oscar nod for tsunami drama The
Impossible than she’s in over her head trying to pass
herself off as Princess Dianal. She must have some
nerve, too, tackling the last days of “the most famous
woman in the world” when no ﬁlm—maker in this
country would dare touch the story.

As it turns out, Watts and Hirschbiegel aren’t that
plucky at all. Their approach to Diana is tentative,
like a couple of tourists on a British beach, dipping
their toes in shallow water and running out again at
the ﬁrst nip of cold. For Hirschbiegel there is a more
bitter irony in that almost a decade after making
Hitler look human in Downfall (and earning an Oscar
nomination), he has failed to do for Diana what he did
for the most evil man who ever lived.

The cocked head, the tilted chin, the searching
gaze beneath ﬂuttering eyelashes; it’s as if Naomi
Watts is being mildly electrocuted to reproduce all
the ticks and quirks that Diana exhibited in her 1995
interview with Martin Bashirz. It’s easy to imagine
Hirschbiegel behind the camera with his ﬁnger on the
buzzer, pressing every time he wants an emotional
reaction. Unfortunately, it does not have the desired
effect.

What was Diana thinking? It’s difﬁcult to tell
behind the mascara and the nervous mannerisms. This
rendering is very blonde and very bland.

That interview with Bashir is a ﬂashpoint for
the ﬁlm, but it’s Diana’s romance with Pakistani
heart surgeon Hasnat Khan (much too earnestly
played by Lost star Naveen Andrews) that provides
its framework. He falls hook, line and sinker for
that eyelash thing, but if this is a love story between
sinner and saint, he’s the one wearing the halo. “1 save
lives,” he says (more than once) and Diana is suitably
impressed.

.....‘.M.~wmm‘m _ U u

Not to be outdone, though, she wanders through
mineﬁelds, kisses sick children and invites an old blind
man in a crowd to touch her face. Her humanitarian
work is reductively portrayed — just another way
to elicit sympathy for her troubles, because long
eyelashes will only get you so far.

It’s tempting to think that Diana’s charitable efforts
were, in some way, an attempt to redeem her less
attractive features, but Hirschbiegel doesn’t bridge
the gap between the conﬂicting sides of her character.
He doesn’t even try. He only hints at her manipulative
tendencies. Diana makes light of being “a mad bitch
stalker” after breaking into Khan’s ﬂat, donning
rubber gloves and proceeding to (shock, horror) clean
the kitchen.

She’s also seen playing cat-and-mouse games
with the press when Dodi Fayed3 enters the picture.
Of course no one could sympathise with a bunch of
slobbering press hounds, but what of the man who
was killed alongside her? He only gets two lines in
the script (bad news for jobbing actor Cas Anvar), but
according to this ﬁlm, he was only bait to make Khan
jealous. Best to keep him in the background then, in
case he starts looking like the forgotten victim in all
this.

The thing is, Diana was lonely. Oh so lonely
 That’s how Geraldine James explains away her
questionable behaviour as acupuncturist and friend
Oonagh Toffolo. Diana’s relationship with Khan is
marked by separation because be ﬁrmly insists that he
is “a private man”, unable to see how he can Operate
on people’s hearts (“saving people’s livesl”) with paps
shoving cameras in his face.

On the other hand, he can’t live without Diana and
the montage-friendly fun they had: watching telly on
the sofa, frolicking on the beach and in the bedroom,
her head thrown back in rapturous laughter — oftenUnit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

at serious risk of tipping the wig she wore to disguise Cottage not open?’ The park is a strange place to meet

herself. Then there were the late—night dinners at except that it offers Watts the chance to do a Tom

Chicken Cottage, presumably because that’s the only Cruise and run off at speed through the dark empty

place Open after midnight. streets, with strained expression, cursing a world that
The dialogue is as stodgy as the contents of a seems to be against her. And Hirschbiegel gets to tick

bargain bucket. Khan occasionally throws a little off yet another cliché.

poetry into the mix, but very often they’re just Truth? Maybe you can’t handle the truth.

attacking each other with the blunt realities of the

Situation, i.e. that she is the most famous woman in the
World and he’s busy (saving lives!)_ 1 Princess Diana formerly married to Prince Charles, heir to the

When Hasnat calls Diana to the middle of Hyde BritlSh throne . . .
Park in the dead Ofthe night for yet another round 2 1995 interview with Martin Bashlr a famous TV InterVIew after

. . . . . her divorce
1 l
OfStaFmg the bhridmg y Obvasithe on y bulnmg 3 Dodi Fayed Diana’s partner at the time of her death
question that springs to mind is, Was the Chicken

ACTIVITY 1.50 1 ‘

1 Working in small groups, divide up the following features and look for
them in this extract: ‘

From a review by Stella Papamichael, Radio Times.

the use of apparent compliments which are then undercut
the use of direct statements to state a viewpoint clearly
words and phrases that create a downbeat tone

the use of contrasts

the use of adjectives and adverbs which reveal tone or perspective 55

the use of internal thoughts as if the reviewer is thinking out loud

points where the reviewer’s voice emerges openly.
2 When you have ﬁnished, discuss:

I what you think the reviewer’s opinion is,

I how you would describe it.

You will need to go beyond saying that she likes/dislikes the ﬁlm and ﬁnd
a way of expressing the tone of the critic.

000i: VRTHER RESEARCH Further practice

Now, take at least two or three of the aspects from the bulleted list above and write
a partial analysis of the language and style of this ﬁlm review. Explore how the
writer’s response to the ﬁlm is presented.

A restaurant review

Read this review. It is a food critic’s opinion about his experience of eating in a
particular restaurant. As you read, pick out words and phrases that indicate:

 

l
l
l
l
l
I the writer’s state of mind, and how thoughts ‘pop’ up in the review ’
I his observations about the place and the food, and how that changes or I
develops
I speciﬁc details that indicate his own knowledge, or lack of it (how much is he I
pretending not to know a lot?)