o o ‘5 FURTHER RESEARCH

Cambridge International A Level English Language

ACTIVITY 5.31

Sociolect

 

older members of your family or community about the language they used

Investigate how social media are changing the language of your region Ask  »
when they were younger and how they think it has changed. a
a“;

Sociolect is a variety of language used by a particular social group which usually
refers to age, occupation, gender, or ethnicity. Sociolect is easily confused with
dialect but remember that dialect has a geographical basis whereas sociolect is

socioeconomic.

The loose composition of sociolect groups means that they will naturally come
into contact with other members of the community and so the practice of code
switching occurs where people switch back and forth between two different styles

of language.

Ihe Tamil caste system in Sri Lanka have scholarly Brahmin members who use
different vocabulary amongst themselves but switch codes when they speak to the
non—Brahmin people. In the United States, African Americans may use African
American Vernacular English also known as Ebom’cs amongst themselves (e.g. If I
don’t get out my sister room I get in trouble) but code switch to standard American
English in different circumstances.

Code switching of sociolect groups is closely linked to language registers, where
an appropriate style of English is needed to match the context. Sociolects are also
linked with different social classes in many societies.

"lhese have been discussed in previous sections and the following activities will
help you to review what you have learned.

ACTIVITY 5.32

1 In British English the word dinner is often seen as
part of a sociolect vocabulary depending on the
time when the meal is eaten. Research this word and
explain its links with social class.

In British English the descriptors for the sweet course
at the end of a meal are variously known as pudding,
sweet, dessert, afters. Linguists use this vocabulary
choice as a sociolect variable. If you have access to
various British English speakers, ask them which
word they use and why.

Age groups may share a core of common vocabulary.
Select a teenage interest group and compile a list of
current words and phrases that they use regularly.
Identify words and phrases now considered outdated.
Do these words have more recent replacements?

4 Explain why occupational groups have a set of speciﬁc

vocabulary and technical terms. Select an occupation
group such as lawyers, or heavy metal music
enthusiasts and list words and phrases they may use
along with non—technical equivalents. Give the list to
a non-specialist to test their understanding. Which
terms did they ﬁnd difficult, and why?

Gender groups may be included here. List ﬁve features
often present in conversation between females.
Explain why these may be absent when men are
conversing.

Investigate the sociolect of a group you are familiar
with. Assess the distinctiveness of their language. To
what extent do members of other groups use the same
sociolect?

 

 

 ‘Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

ldiolect

Each of us has an idiolect which is our own personal language. This is made up of
the words we choose and extends to Our patterns of conversation — what we say and
how we speak, for example our tone, speed and pitch. This springs from our own
life experiences.

We alter our style of speech whenever we perceive it to be appropriate. You
may have the beneﬁts of speaking more than one language and be able to change

between these languages according to circumstances, adding to the sophistication
with which you use language on a daily basis.

ACTIVITY 5.33

Select a close friend and family member.

1 Listen to them speak as naturally as possible and try to describe the
features that make their speech patterns unique. 1.

2 Note their conversational style and their paralinguistic features. What 

 additional descriptions have you added? l
G 3 Now think about your own idiolect. Use the same analysis for your own ‘
 For m ore practice and self_ style of speech as for your observations on other people. Compare your i
evaluation on this unit, see own perception of your idiolect with those that a friend has made about 

page 289. you. ‘

217Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Unit 6: English as a global language

ACTIVITY 6.1

In this set of activities you will learn about the
geographical spread of widely spoken languages and also

reﬂect on your use of English.

Stop for a moment to think about what makes us human.

Language must be one of the most important factors, as everything we have eVer
achieved springs from us being able to communicate our wants and needs. In this
unit we shall look at English as a global language which plays a signiﬁcant role in
the world communication necessary in the let century.

English and other languages

Many of us live in societies where English is either the native language or a second
language. English has spread around the world to become a global language,

It is the world’s second largest language and the oﬂicial language in about 70
countries.)

There are roughly 7000 languages spoken in the world, but 90% of these are
spoken by fewer than 100,00 people. There are claims that 46 languages have only
a single speaker! So where does English ﬁt in? It is eclipsed only by Mandarin
Chinese in terms of the actual number of speakers but English is spoken more
widely round the planet than any other language.

English is spoken as a ﬁrst or native language by around 375 million speakers
in the world but speakers of English as a second language outnumber those who
speak it as a ﬁrst language. So English as a ﬁrst or second language is spoken by
approximately two billion people throughout the world. One in four of the world’s
population speaks English with some level of competence and the demand to learn
English from the other three quarters is increasing.

languages in which you have a special interest. How
do the numbers of native and non-native speakers for
these languages compare?

'lhe world’s most widely—spoken languages in order of 3 List the languages you know of. How does this

the number of speakers are:

1 Mandarin Chinese
2 English

3 Spanish

4 Hindi

5 Arabic

6 Bengali

1 Use an atlas to map the countries where the
population speaks these languages, either as native
(ﬁrst) or second—language speakers.

2 Research the numbers of native and non-native

number compare with the estimate of the total global
languages?

7 Russian

8 Portuguese 4 Which languages have you learned? Why? Which

9 Japanese languages would you like to learn? What use might
10 German you make of new languages?
11 French 5 Are there any advantages in speaking more than one

language?
6 Do you feel any differently towards people who speak
the same language as you and those who

speak another language? Give reasons for your
answer.

speakers for the top ﬁve languages and any otherEsperanto an artificial
universal language

Unit 6: English as a global language

If you have ever been a tourist visiting a country where you do not know

the language, you will appreciate that, at the very least, the diﬂiculties of
communication between people who speak different languages can be very
frustrating! On the other hand it is immensely rewarding to appreciate a society’s
way of life other than your own, by speaking their language ﬂuently.

Language does not exist in a vacuum; the growth of different global languages
often reﬂects both the geography and history of diﬁerent speaking groups.

There have been many attempts to create a single worldwide language. The best
known of these is Esperanto, with a current estimate of about 3 million speakers
but it has failed to make a signiﬁcant difference to the national languages of the
world. Indeed it might be argued that the language spoken is part of a person’s
national identity. Many cultures have myths concerning the reason for the diversity
of languages, for example the Tower of Babel.

 

The Tower of Babel

This story is found in the Christian Bible, in the Book ofGenesis, and
gives one explanation for the many languages spoken across the globe.
According to this story, the people of Shinar (Babylonia) decided to
build a giant tower that would reach into heaven. it was an enormous
enterprise, taking a long time and lots of cooperation among people
who all spoke the same language. After a while, God disrupted the
project. To make it impossible for the workers to communicate, he
forced everyone to speak a different language.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

ACTIVITY 6.2 .g ‘

Fewer than 100 languages are spoken in all of Europe west of Russia, but
Africa and India have over 1000 native languages each; the small Paciﬁc
island nation of Vanuatu, with an area of less than SOOOsq miles has 110
languages!

1 Would a universal language such as Esperanto put an end to these
language variations? Explain the reasons for your answer. 
2 Would you like to learn an artiﬁcial global language such as Esperanto? “ a
Why or why not?
3' Do you know of another myth explaining the diversity of languages in the
world?
4 What reasons can you suggest for the existence of so many languages
around the world? Why do you think the different languages are
distributed in the way they are?

 

For more about the different 5 Should we aim for all people to have a common language? Would this help
varieties of English, see communication between different groups? Explain your point of view.
page 235. ‘
Language takeovers
Why does one language grow and another decline or even die out?
We have already established that the world spread of languages is dominated
a by relatively few languages which have a very large number of speakers. Many

languages have already become extinct and languages are continuing to die as their
last remaining native speakers die. It matters whether a language dies out because
of the spoken traditions which may disappear along with it. As many (but not all)
languages die out, their place is often taken by English. This takeover process is not
a recent situation.

Throughout history there are examples of languages that have been widely
spoken beyond their borders, becoming the linguafranca, particularly for the
purposes of government. For example, Latin was used throughout the Roman
Empire, and Spanish became the language of many Spanish colonies in Central
and South America. It is not unusual for a language to spread beyond its native
region, but what makes English unique is the many distinctive varieties that have
developed from it.

In his book The World Until Yesterday, scientist Jared Diamond explains that
world regions have repeatedly been swept by what he terms language steamrollers.
This is a situation where one group which has some advantage of population, food
supply or technology, uses that advantage to impose its language on the regions it
takes over and exploits. It is a question of power. The language of the more powerful
group replaces the local language(s) by driving out or killing its speakers or by
forcing them to speak the incomer’s language.

In the case of English, for example, the growth of its worldwide status is linked
to Britain’s naval and trading power which was so important in the growth of
the British Empire and the colonisation of places like the Indian subcontinent,
Southern Africa and Australasia. In the military and commercial activities that
followed, native languages were often suppressed by British rulers. The arrival of
British settlers in North America in the early 17th century was another signiﬁcant

‘ KEY TERMS

    

ﬂ

\W 7Unit 6: English as a global language

 

ACTIVITY 6.3

1 Investigate the ways in which one or more of the following languages have
‘steamrollered’ others into minority language status or even extinction.

l Latin and the Roman Empire
l Norman French and the Norman conquest of England in 1066

l Spanish conquests of Central and South America in the 16th and 17th
centuries

 

I French conquests in Asia, Africa and the Americas in the 17th and 18th
centuries

2 Investigate the ways in which English displaced native languages in
the countries which it colonised, for example New Zealand, the Indian
subcontinent, Australia, Singapore, Southern Africa.

Like all living languages, English is changing all the time. The only languages that
do not change are ‘dead’ ones such as Latin or Sanskrit. The English you speak is
different from that of previous generations and English will continue to change
in your lifetime. How? Some linguists predict that English will change in the
same way as Latin, which evolved in different regions to become the core of the
three distinct languages of French, Spanish and Italian. So if English followed this
pattern, it would break up into related but separate languages.

Others predict that as we now live in a ‘global village’ with a constant ﬂow
of personal and media—generated English, the different varieties of English will
converge and a common language will evolve. The following sections of this chapter
will continue to investigate the issues surrounding the status of and changes to
English as a global language.

221

These activities ask you to think about yourself as an 4 If many languages are spoken where you live, what
English speaker in the world today. is the function of English? For example is it used for
ofﬁcial documents and occasions? Do you use
English online? Do you hear it on TV, in ﬁlms and in
songs?

1 What is your language status? Are you a native
English—speaker or do you speak it as a second or
third language? Describe the circumstances in which
you use English.

2 How widely is English spoken where you live? What
other languages co-exist with it?

3 What form of English do you speak? Do you think
it is signiﬁcantly different from Standard British
English? If so, in what ways?

5 Are there languages which used to be spoken in your
area but which are now spoken by fewer people? If so,
why do you think this has happened? Do you think
this language loss is important?

6 How important is it to you to speak English? Explain
your reasons to others in a group debate.Cambridge International A Level English Language

.éiMERiCA

 

A map showing English-speaking How did English become a global language? ’

' ns ofthe world. . . . . . . . .
reglo This section summarises the evolut1on of the English language from its or1g1ns as a

language spoken by Angles and Saxons, tribes in northern Germany, to a language
which is spoken throughout the world. Your own country or region will be a good
case study for the various issues to be discussed.

In its early history, English was not considered to have any status at all and
was considered unworthy of use in any ofﬁcial capacity. The early development of
British English was quite a struggle with little evidence of its worldwide importance
today. 1500 years ago English did not exist. It was brought across to England as
Anglo—Saxon by tribes from Northern Germany in a series of invasions after the
Romans left Britain in 400 CE. The ﬂedgling language came under further threat
from repeated Viking invasions along the east coast of Scotland and England
between 800 and 1000 CE. The Vikings did not speak Anglo—Saxon but a language
called Old Norse. They gained power in the eastern areas of England and were
spreading westwards until a victory by Alfred the Great in 878 saved the Anglo—
Saxon language (which is also referred to as Old English).

After 1066, English disappeared as an ofﬁcial language for two hundred years
as a result of the Norman Invasion of England led by William the Conqueror
(William 1). Norman French became the language of government while Anglo—
Saxon was spoken by the peasant class. English re—emerged three hundred years
later as a combination of the English and French spoken at the time.

Later, bitter battles were fought between the Church who wished to preserve
Latin as the language of church services and the Bible, and those who wished to
change to English. The latter group eventually won and the English language of the
time became dominant in England. However, in the 16th century there were fewer
than ﬁve million English speakers in the world.

\Unit 6: English as a global language

 

Read the extract and, as
preparation for the next
section, research the
different varieties of English
spoken throughout the
world.

English is the dominant language of
the internet.

 

As we have already seen, military and commercial power then launched English
beyond its national borders. The British Empire’s role in the spread of English was
critically important for over 200 years. The international role of Britain declined
during the 20th century but by then the language was sustained by the global
spread of the predominantly English-speaking United States’ economic, political
and military inﬂuence, as well as the inﬂuence of the American media. More
recently, with the dominance of English as the language of the internet, English
continues to be at the forefront of signiﬁcant global developments.

Linguist David Crystal believes that the reason why a language is widely used is
because of the power of the people who speak it. He believes that It’s English turning

up at the right time during these lastfour hundredyeurs or so which has produced the
enormous cultural status that it has.

223

The following is a light—hearted and very speedy summary of the development of
English and raises the issues of the many varieties of English which are spoken.
This leads us to consider the current status and power of English.

Global English — or whose language is it anyway?

In the 1500 years since the Romans left Britain the
English language has shown a unique ability to absorb,
evolve, invade and if we’re honest, steal.

After foreign settlers got it started, it grew into
a fully ﬂedged language all of its own before leaving
home and travelling the world, ﬁrst by the high
seas then via the high speed broadband connection
pilfering words from over 350 languages and
establishing itself as a global institution.

All this despite a written alphabet that bears no
correlation to how it sounds and a highly irregular

system of spelling.

Right now, about 1.5 billion people speak English:
of these about a quarter are native speakers a quarter
speak it as their second language and half are able to
ask for directions to a local swimming pool.

There’s Hinglish, Chinglish, Singlish  so in
conclusion the language has got so little to do with
England these days it may well be time to stop calling
it English and if someone does think up a new name
for it, it should probably be in Chinese.

www.youtube.comCambridge International A Level English Language

 

The status of English as a global language

This section provides some of the evidence for giving English the status of a
language spoken throughout the world. Your own country or region will be a gOO

cl
case study to compare with the world statistics given here.

How can we assess the status of English as a global language?
Here are some key indicators:

 

I the number of ﬁrst language speakers must be high: English is spoken as a ﬁrst
language by around 375 million and as a second language by around 750 million
speakers in the world (British Council ﬁgures).

I users must be spread over a wide geographical area: English is spoken on all
ﬁve continents.

I political and economic alfairs must be stable so that the language can
spread without large—scale opposition: English is the recognised language of
trade, scientiﬁc research and international affairs. It is used by international
organisations like the United Nations, by pilots and by air trafﬁc controllers, by
international traders and by international police agencies.

A further investigation of the importance of English throws up more evidence for
its status as a global language. English can be understood almost everywhere as

it is the predominant language of the world’s media, and the language of cinema,
TV, pop music and computer technology. All over the world, people know and use
many words derived from English.

English is used for:
I three-quarters of the world’s mail
half of the world’s technical and scientiﬁc journals

half of all newspapers
80% of all information stored in computers

many movies and songs
half of European business deals

seven of the largest TV broadcasters (CBS, NBC, ABC, BBC, CBC, CNN,
C-Span).

I
I

I

I all communications for international air and sea trafﬁc
I

I

I

Additionally there are many countries where English is an oﬂicial second
language and where it operates as the language of government, higher education,
international communication, science, technology and the media.

English appears to have dominance as the international language but as we
have seen, times change. At the end of the 20th century The Economist magazine
described English as impregnable, established as the world’s standard language;
an intrinsic part of the global communications revolution. More recently however,
it has been predicted that economic growth in the next 50 years is likely to come
from non—English speaking countries in Asia, South America and the Paciﬁc. These
areas will start to generate wealth and ideas and these ideas will not necessarily
be communicated in English. Education trends in many countries suggest that
languages other than English are providing competition in the school curriculum.

Even at a local level, in Britain, the balance may be shifting. According to a
recent report, there are 240 schools in England where over 90% of students do not
speak English as a ﬁrst language. In the academic year 2012—13, UK Department
of Education ﬁgures revealed that ﬁve primary schools in England (out of a total of

6

\ a a if.1 Summarise the beneﬁts
outlined in the article
of speaking English in a
globalised world. Then
discuss your views on the
role of local languages in
a globalised world.

2 Investigate the
importance of English in
the area where you live,
and then evaluate the role
of other local languages.

Global English

Everyone talks about how English is the global
language, but that means more than hearing
occasional American pop songs on your local radio.
English has become the global language because it has
become a vital part of international society, culture
and the economy. Whether you’re aiming to be a
professor or a reporter, a doctor or a banker, knowing
English can give you what it takes to succeed.

It’s become almost a cliché that speaking English
well is a huge help in the business world, and it’s
increasingly true as international trade expands every
year, bringing new countries into contact. Many of the
best MBA programs are taught in English, so speaking
it well can put you in a position to get the best training
and credentials. With more and more companies being
bought or merging with foreign ﬁrms, you never know
if one day you might need to speak English to your
new boss!

If your ambitions lie in science or medicine, you
can’t neglect English either. Much of the technical
terminology is based on English words, and if you
want to learn about the latest developments and
discoveries from around the world, you’ll read about
them in journals and research reports published in

TIP

Unit 6: English as a global language

nearly 17,000) had no native English speakers, with 100% of their pupils speaking
English as a second language.

The current status of English in the world is as a native language and also as
a second language suitable for Ofﬁcial functions where it is neutral and avoids
favouring a particular regional dialect. Where English is used in conjunction
with other languages, its use may indicate ofﬁcialdom whereas the local languages
function for friendship and informal communication. In countries where English

is used as an ofﬁcial second language, the majority of the population is able to code
switch when circumstances require it.

In the following sections you will explore the status of British English and the ways

in which it has been transformed into many different varieties of English, each with
its own particular characteristics.

English, no matter whether the scientists who wrote
them are from China or Norway. And, of course, with
good conversational English, you’ll be able to mix at
conferences and seminars.

English also opens doors in the academic world. Of
course, if the best program in your ﬁeld is in England
or America, English will give you the opportunity to
study with the top scholars. Many Western universities
are becoming highly international, with visiting
scholars, students and professors from all around the
world, and their common working language is English.
Attending international conferences and publishing in
foreign journals are some of the key steps to success in
academia.

Journalists and writers around the world are
ﬁnding a good command of English to be an
increasingly useful skill. Even if you’re writing your
articles and doing interviews in your own language,
with good English you can get background material
from international wire services and papers and
magazines from around the world. You can interview
foreign businessmen, diplomats and maybe even get
sent to cover overseas stories.

www.englishtown.com

You need to be very clear about the significance of English amongst the world’s
languages, with evidence to support your statements.

When writing essays it is important to be able to summarise complex ideas and

processes. The way in which English has become a global language is complex so
try to select important reasons with evidence.

 

225Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

   

0 0 o FURTHER RESEARCH

ACTIVITY 6.7

   

1 Research details of military, industrial, ﬁnancial and cultural events where  r

the English language has assumed an important role.
2 English and the internet: discuss with your fellow students the language(s)

;:
you use on the internet. Try to assess the types of websites which are in  ,

English and whether websites in other languages provide translation
facilities.

3 Given that the internet is likely to remain the main means of global
communication, assess the relative importance of English for you
alongside any other languages you may use.

Whose English is it? Kachru’s Circles model

Following the development of English from its British origins to its current status
as a global language, we need to examine its spread and the different ways in
which it is used. From there we can compare some issues and also some of the
characteristics of Standard and Non—Standard English throughout the world.

An important point raised in the previous section is that the number of people
learning and speaking English as a foreign language is now much larger than the
number of native speakers. Should those who speak English as a foreign language
therefore set the standard? Although change is happening, all varieties of English
do not yet have equal status. A key issue is whether there is, or should be, one
‘correct’ form of English which all others should be measured by or whether all
varieties have equal merit.

This issue goes further than simply the level of competence in speaking and
writing the language; it is central to the relative status of the different forms of
English, where they are spoken and the status of local varieties in. relation to what
is perceived to be correct form of the language. Linguist David Crystal feels that
by weight of numbers alone, the language produced by non-native speakers is
bound to have an effect on the way in which the language will evolve since contact
is fundamental to the way in which a language is spoken. If we get along with
people, we want to sound like them (this is the process of accommodation) and so a
common form of pronunciation and syntax develops within a community. Within
the UK and in different areas of the English—speaking world, local accents and
dialects have developed. -

A classiﬁcation about the origins and usage of English will help us to look at the
way in which the English language has spread and is continuing to spread across
the globe.

ACTIVITY 6.8

I Discuss the variety of English which you and those around you speak. Is
it a local variety or part of a country or region-wide style? Give reasons for
your answer.

I Can you assess the status of the English you speak in relation to other
Englishes? If it is possible to do so, on what basis have you made this
I - judgement?Unit 6: English as a global language

The spread of English: Kachru’s Circles

The rapid spread of English has given rise to models which classify the ways English
is used throughout the world. One of the most inﬂuential models was developed by
the linguist Braj Kachru in 1985. Kachru’s Circles is a model uSed to describe the
circumstances in which English is spoken.

Kachru’s model consists of three circles:

The Inner Circle

English is the native language or mother tongue of most people in these countries,
The total number of English speakers in the inner circle is approximately 380
million. Other languages are spoken in these regions but English dominates
communication here. English is used for all administrative and social purposes,
The Inner Circle represents the traditional bases of English in regions where it is
now used as a primary language: the United Kingdom, the United States, Australia,

New Zealand, Ireland, English-speaking Canada and South Africa, and some of
Caribbean territories.

The Outer Circle

In these regions, English is regarded as a second language, where much of the
administration is through the medium of English, mainly as a colonial legacy, as

in Asia and Africa. In these areas, English is not the native tongue, but serves as

a useful common language — the linguafranca — between ethnic and language
groups. Higher education, the legislature and judiciary, national commerce and
ceremonial functions are carried out predominantly in English. This Circle includes
India, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Malaysia, Tanzania, Singapore, Kenya, and
non—English speaking South Africa.

The Expanding Circle

These are countries where English plays no historical or governmental role, but
where it is nevertheless widely used as a medium of international communication.
English may be employed for speciﬁc, limited purposes, usually business English
and the internet. This includes much of the rest of the world’s population,
particularly China, Russia, Japan, most of Europe, Korea, Egypt, and Indonesia.

These circles are interesting both historically and geographically but are also
central to the standards or ‘norms’ of English. But how and from where do these
norms of the language come? Most people have an idea of how the language should
be spoken, especially in the rapidly changing modern world. The issue here is
whether, with English as a global language, ideas of correctness come from one
source such as Standard British English or whether any group speaking English
across the globe can set the standards.

The most generally held View is that the Inner Circle (e.g. UK, US) is norm-
providing; this means that English language norms are developed in these
countries and spread outwards. The Outer Circle (mainly New Commonwealth
countries) is norm—developing, easily adopting and perhaps developing its own
norms. The Expanding Circle (which includes much of the rest of the world) is
norm—dependent, because it relies on the standards set by native speakers in the
Inner Circle. This is a one directional ﬂow and learners of English as a foreign
language in the Expanding Circle look to the standards set in the Inner and Outer
Circles. V

This model may seem very theoretical and yet it goes to the core of the dynamics
of the spread and the usage of English.

227Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

   

e.g. China,

Russia «
500—1000 2
million

   

Expanding
circle

 
 
 

Kachru’s Circles of English.

1
ACTIVITY 6.9 ‘

1 Discuss the variety of English you speak and decide which of the circles
it belongs in. Do you think that the variety of English you use has been ,
inﬂuenced by contact with other countries and their English speech? Give ‘ L
reasons for your answer.
2 Kachru’s Circles model assumes that the spread of English is one way,
from the Inner Circle outwards. How is language spread? Consider your
contact with other speakers of English through the internet and media and
discuss whether you think the spread is one way only.
3 If you are a non-native speaker of English, in what situations do you use
your native tongue and what situations do you use English? Explain why.
4 Do you think Kachru’s Circles model is a useful classiﬁcation? Give
reasons for your views.

5 ‘0 ’5 FURTHER RESEARCHUnit 6: English as a global language

 

Attempt these essay questiOns.

1 Describe a model which explains the spread of English throughout the
world. Explain the reasoning of the model and evaluate its usefulness in
showing different varieties of Englishes.

2 ‘English spreads out from a core area of native speakers.’ Describe a theory
which supports this statement and, using speciﬁc case studies, evaluate
ways in which different types of English are found worldwide.

‘ KEY TERMS

    

A trawl around dictionaries, websites and English Language textbooks
reveals that a deﬁnition of Standard English is often very general and stated in

T", researcher Paul Kerswill states that he has actively been trying to avoid a deﬁnition 229

The term Standard English is of Standard English because the idea of it as correct or good English is closely

critical to your understanding related to the perspective of the particular language user. 1
of different styles of English. So what is the generally accepted understanding of Standard English? It

Make sure you underStand originated in the UK as the variety of English spoken in the politically and

the Status .0 Standard EngllSh economically powerful triangle between Oxford, Cambridge and London and
and when It IS used. SpEleIC

case Studies of different over the last 200 years it has come to represent the norm of spoken and written

English styles will be valuable English. It is often referred to as BBC English, as it is associated with a distinctive
to back up your opinions with form of media communication. Because Standard English follows the accepted 1 i
constructions of the language, it is the form of English most often learned by

non-native speakers. It is generally perceived as the variety of English spoken by
educated people. . in 1
l

i

evidence.

u v FURTHER RESEARCH 

Change the following examples into Standard English form. Consider which
grammatical rules have been broken in each case. fl

I I ain’t done nothing.
I She come here tomorrow.

 

I dunno. ‘ 
It was him What did it. l

Yup.
Did you do it? No I never. lCambridge International A Level English Language

 

Received Pronunciation (RP)

Standard English is usually associated with an accent known as ReceiVed
Pronunciation, which for many people is perceived as ‘proper’ English. While

it is estimated that only 3% of the British population use RP, it has always been
disproportionately inﬂuential, spoken by upper-class people, academics, actors) TV
personalities, politicians and teachers.

ReceivedPronunciation (RP) is
sometimes referred to as ‘The

Queen’s English’. The monarch
speaks in an advanced form of

this accent.

 

establishment. Today, a much wider range of British regional accents and dialects

TIP can be heard on the BBC.

To make sure you understand

and recognise the sounds and I I _ . .
grammatical constructions Brltish soc1ety had largely been organised. The lower-middle and working classes

of RP, try to watch or usth become more socially mobile and more afﬂuent. Standard English and RP became
to television, radio and associated with the middle classes, their success and their growing prosperity, to
onl'ne recommgs Wh'Ch use which many now aspired. Looking outwards, RP became the recognisable and

:23;anliftifriﬁggﬁunigere ‘proper’ voice of Britain for speakers of English in other countries.

serious documentary and ' . .
news broadcasts on nation a[ Grammar With its recognised standard grammatical constructions. With only 3%

channe[s, of British English speakers actually using RP it is not the most widely used accent,

\