Unit 1: Reading non—fiction

 

 

I Now read the rest of the extract on pages 31 and 32 and list further key words
and phrases. You may wish to move beyond looking at verbs, adjectives and
similes and draw upon other skills or features you have learned about.

ACTIVITY 1.25

Write a commentary on the style and language of the second part of the text,
from Her high tones encourage me  In addition to references to similes,
metaphors and verb usages, comment on the impact of the present tense.

Summary

Remember these key points from this section:

I Whilst descriptive writing can be found in both ﬁction and non-ﬁction writing
there are speciﬁc features and elements which are often common to both.

I Look for speciﬁc, rather than general vocabulary; powerful and vivid detail;
reference to the senses; patterns and groups of words which build a whole
picture.

Comment on the effect of language use and in particular on imagery.

The voice of the writer can encompass both positive and negative perspectives; it
may be ambivalent or qualify what is said.

Personal writing

In this section you will: 33

I read a range of personal texts, including diaries, letters, memoirs and
autobiographies

I explore the impact of ﬁrst person accounts

I develop your understanding of ‘voice’ in texts

I explore a number of key techniques, such as how writers use dialogue.

What is personal writing?

We could say that all writing is to some extent ‘personal’ in that someone had to
author it, but clearly some texts are explicitly personal in that we know who the
writer is, what their situation is and, often, why they are writing.

Personal writing can allow the reader to:

I witness characters and events from the point of view of the narrator, especially
when written in the ﬁrst person (that is, using I)

I provide a glimpse of the writer’s more private thoughts and attitudes

I explore reasons and motives for behaving in particular ways or feeling
particular emotions.

Letters

Whilst written and posted letters have been superseded in many places by email or
the ease of making a phone call, letters still offer the writer a chance to be reﬂective
and thoughtful.

Read this text which is taken from a letter written by a son, now living in
Norway, to his mother back home in Zimbabwe.Cambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

Remember the day I arrived in my new town, one of
my many stops on this journey that is life. The rains at
the airport in Stavanger brought me memories of you
working in the ﬁelds, not shielding yourself from the
warm raindrops. I remembered you then, way back.
For, I knew you would have composed an instant
poem to celebrate ﬁrst raindrops, those songs about
the ﬁsh eagle up in the sky, the harbinger of rain,
giving life to people, animals and plants.

Here they still have not stopped cursing the rain.

I always remind them that one who curses the rain

is a Witch who wishes that life should not be brought
to this earth. But no, they still curse at their gentle,
thunderless rain. They prefer the sun instead. Or the
white snow which paints the street white as if cotton
wool has embraced the whole earth. My fear of snow
still persists, especially when it hardens and becomes
slippery ice.

For me, a step on ice is a potential disaster. Ice
is more slippery than the muddy clay soils of your
maize ﬁelds. Norwegians hardly fall on ice. They
ﬂoat on it like Arabs walking on sand, never sinking,
never falling. They even run races on the ice and win
competitions! Can you imagine?

...By the way, I forget that you have never seen the
sea. I remember you telling me stories about the place
where all rivers poured their waters, in our language,
gungwa (the water to quench all thirsts). It is just that,

 

and Norwegians are people ofthe sea. They play in

it, swim in it, dive in it, ride fast boats in it and ﬁsh
there. They travel over the sea to many places. All
their towns and villages are by the sea: it brings them
everything they want, friends and enemies, food from
far away places, and petrol which they discovered
under the depths ofthe sea. The sea is full ofso many
creatures which you ﬁnd on their plate for almost
every meal. According to Norwegians, if you don’t eat
ﬁsh, like me, you are supposed to be miserable...

I hope the thunderous rains have come by now.
Maybe the maize you planted is already the height of
a small child. Every sun Which rises gives me fresh
memories of you, and every early sunset reminds me
that I am in other lands. Maybe one day we will sit
together, switch off the street lights and gaze at the
beauty of that lovely African moon which displays
the image of a rabbit with large ears. Maybe I will be
older, but I will not have given up the idea of being
young.

Now I know that there are so many streams to the
river of knowledge, and one of them is to live in other
lands.

Your Son,
Chenjerai

From A Letter To MyMother by Chenjerai Hove.

Key technique: improving your expression

So far, in this book, most of the attention has been on the features you should look
for and comment on in a text, but none of this information is of any value to you
unless you are able to express yourself ﬂuently and clearly.

ACTIVITY 1.26

1 As for previous passages, begin by listing key words

and phrases in this extract which might tell us

something about the mood and feelings of the writer.

2 Now look at this word bank describing tone and

mood. Select the words that you think best describe
the writer’s mood (or moods) in the text.

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

intimate personal reﬂective observational gently comic nostalgic angry

anxious determined disbelieving elegiac ironic loving tender

direct conversational poetic sharp playful impatient thoughtful
$13 Ifyou think the moods change or develop, write
the appropriate word (e.g. gently comic) on a copy
of the extract alongside the relevant paragraph.
Alternatively, write the term down with the number of

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

4 Discuss your ﬁndings with a partner and then share
with another pair. Try to build a clear picture of how
the text works and reference your ideas to speciﬁc
words or phrases in the text.

the paragraph next to it (e.g. thoughtful, paragraph 1).

  
 
 

TIP

When writing about a
passage, try to use ‘mood/

tone’ words such as the ones
from the word bank opposite,
or any others you feel are
appropriate to describe the
style of the text.

my

 

Now read this extract from a commentary on the text and look at the annotations
around it.

The tone is personal and intimate, with the writer inviting his mother

to participate in shared knowledge (Remember). From the beginning he
creates a philosophical mood with his reference to thejourney that is life.
The use of the metaphor seems to imply that this is a moment of pause,
a stop. for reflection on hisconstant travels. His words are nostalgic and
gentle as he reminisces about the past. The references to the rain and
the warm raindrops suggest a mood of refreshing memories, echoed in
the way he describes such weather as giving life, associating water with
vitality and creation.

The writer contrasts his own fond and positive memories ofthe
African landscape and weather with the ways in which the rain is
viewed in his current homeland. There is a contrast in the way the harsh
sounding cursing  curses  curse is repeated to convey this sense of
negativity on the part of his fellow residents. There is almost a sense of
disbelief in his use ofthe phrase Butno, as if the writer cannot come to
terms with their exasperating attitude.

>.
D:
E
Z
LLI
E
E
O
U

Working on your own, ﬁnd other words in the second part of the commentary
which have been used to explain the mood of the writer. "lhese are likely to be, but
are not exclusively, adjectives such as the ones in the word bank opposite.

Further practice
Look at the rest of the extract and write two further paragraphs.

I In the ﬁrst, comment on what the writer has to say about the Norwegians’ love
of the sea and what mood this creates.

I In the second, comment on his thOughts about his homeland and his thoughts
for the future.

Dia ries
Diaries can provide windows into people’s thoughts whilst at the same time
conveying narrative accounts of events and people encountered. As one might

expect, a strong sense of voice is often present.
Here are the most common key conventions found in diaries:

I Like personal letters, we expect diaries to have an element of reﬂection and
thought.

I They also share elements of narrative texts in that they recount events.

 

35Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

I They are usually organised into chronological ‘chunks’ so that entries follow
consecutively.

and the events?

Today the most terrible thing happened.1 Our beloved teacher, Miss Li, has

disappeared, and so, apparently, has the school money! We had been waiting2
in the classroom for her when the Principal rushed in. His face was ashen.

He asked us ifwe had seen Miss Li.
W I am so upset! I cannot believe she has done this. She must have a very

Write the next diary
entry from the student’s

 

what she knows. Outside, the little ﬂame—coloured bird that sits on our white

pOint OfVieW’ In it he/She fence and sings is silent. He knows how I feel!
reveals more information
about Miss Cheung’s 1 pastsimple

2 past perfect continuous

disappearance. Use the past,
present and future tenses.

0 0 C FURTHER READING

I what is happening now. (The ﬁnal reference to the bird who is silent now, in the
present, creates an ongoing, feeling of unhappiness.)Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

. we.» max.

   

March 17th, 1912 Depot. We leave here our theodolite, a camera, and

...I can only write at lunch and then only occasionally. Oates’ sleeping-bags. Diaries, &c., and geological 3-,
The cold is intense, —40° at midday. My companions specimens carried at Wilson’s special request, will be

are unendingly cheerful, but we are all on the verge found with us or on our sledge.

of serious frostbites, and though we constantly talk of
fetching through I don’t think anyone of us believes it
in his heart.

We are cold on the march now, and at all times
except meals. Yesterday we had to lay up for a blizzard
and to-day we move dreadfully slowly. We are at N0.
14 pony camp, only two pony marches from One Ton

March 18th, 1912

To-day, lunch, we are 21 miles from the depot. Ill
fortune presses, but better may come. We have had
more wind and drift from ahead yesterday; had to stop
marching; wind N.W., force 4, temp. —35°. No human
being could face it, and we are worn out nearly.

 

ACTIVITY 1.29

1 Make a list of key words and phrases in the ﬁrst two of Captain Scott’s
diary extracts. Also note down the tenses that are used.

Look back to page 27 for more
about connotations

2 Now answer these questions independently:

I What do these words, phrases and tenses tell us about Scott’s past,
current and future situation?

I How do they help us to understand Scott’s mood and state of mind?

TIP

‘Reading between the lines’ . . .
is a useful way ofdescribmg Key technlque. Inference and deduction

the act of looking for what is One of the key reading skills that you have already begun to develop is that of being

Stilrggested rather than stated able to infer meaning from what is said, especially when information or feelings are
eCtly' implied rather than stated directly.

Read these further extracts from Scott’s diaries.

 

GCambridge International AS Level English Language

 

March 18th, 1912 and biscuit and a half a pannikin of cocoa cooked

My right foot has gone, nearly all the toes — two days over the spirit. Then, contrary to expectation, we got

ago I was proud possessor of best feet. These are the warm and all slept well. To—day we started in the usual

steps of my downfall. Like an ass I mixed a small dragging manner. Sledge dreadfully heavy. We are

Spoonful of curry powder with my melted pemmican — 151/2 miles from the depot and ought to get there in

it gave me Violent indigestion. I lay awake and in pain three days. What progress! We have two days’ food 

all night; woke and felt done on the march; foot went but barely a day’s fuel. All our feet are getting bad — 
and I didn’t know it. A very small measure of neglect Wilson’s best, my right foot worst, left all right. There l '
and have a foot which is not pleasant to contemplate. is no chance to nurse one’s feet till we can get hot food ‘ _ ,
Bowers takes ﬁrst place in condition, but there is not into us. Amputation is the least I can hope for now, but i  ’
much to choose after all. The others are still conﬁdent will the trouble spread? That is the serious question. 9

of getting through — or pretend to be — I don’t know! The weather doesn’t give us a chance — the wind from

We have the last half ﬁll of oil in our primus and a N. to NW. and —400 temp, to—day.

very small quantity of spirit — this alone between us
and thirst. The wind is fair for the moment, and that is
perhaps a fact to help. The mileage would have seemed
ridiculously small on our outward journey.

March 23rd, 1912

Blizzard bad as ever — Wilson and Bowers unable to
start — to-morrow last chance — no fuel and only one or
two of food left — must be near the end. Have decided
March 19th, 1912 it shall be natural — we shall march for the depot with
Lunch. We camped with difﬁculty last night, and were or Without our effects and die in our tracks...

dreadfully cold till after our supper of cold pemmican R. Scott.

a ACTIVITY 130 Work through Activity 1.30 then read this commentary about Scott’s diaries.

Discuss with a partner:

I What does Scott tell us
directly (i.e what he tells
us as plain fact or direct
statement)?

I What can we infer

There seems to be a sense of conflict in the moods right from the start.
Scott himselfseems negative and pessimistic from the opening without
any doubt or qualification: The cold is intense is a direct'statement
allowing no doubt at all to his thoughts and feelings and his reference
to how I don’t think anyone of us believes it in his heart reveals his very
from what he says, by private thoughts and beliefs expressed to himself but not his colleagues.
understanding the dues Yet those around him are more positive, trying to be unending/y

or hints in What he cheerful, the first word a contrast to Scott’s own sense of certainty
writes? and finality. His sense of foreboding is illuminated by his use of words
like dreadfully (repeated later on) but at times he tries to see the more
optimistic frame of mind conveyed by his colleagues: /ll fortune presses,
but better may come, perhaps the syntax suggesting that his first view
is the one that dominates his mind. Indeed, his negativity seems to take
over again as he resorts to direct statement without qualification once
more: No human being could face it, words implying the dark state of his
mind and a sense that little hope remains and that the shadow ofdeath
hovers over everything they do.

>.
D:
E
2
Lu
2
2
O
U

 

x KEYTERMS

    

 

inference and deduction are skills you can apply to almost any text: in R. H. Tawney’s
.TheAttack on page 41, we are not told what happens to the officer but consider how
inference might help you draw your own conclusions.

6)M

‘ Working with the same
partner, discuss:

I how effectively the
commentary picks up on
what is directly stated
and what is implied
whether the commentary
captures Scott’s mood
and how it changes.

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

Other diary writers, especially in times of crisis like wartime, may respond to a
particular experience using opposing moods as in Scott’s diary entries, yet with a
more psychological and reﬂective outlook.

The following diary extracts were written at the time of the outbreak of the
Second World War.

ACTIVITY 1.32

1 Read the diary extracts. As you do so, consider how they link back to some
of the descriptive passages you have already encountered, in particular the
extract from Touching the Void on page 21.

2 List key words and phrases and identify the ways in which the writer

creates opposing moods in his writing.

3 Find examples of lists of three or any other techniques or features you have
encountered in the book so far (e.g. imagery, moving from an internal to
an external location).

20 April

Yesterday, up early in the morning — the washing,
the dressing, the brushing, then to the station on my
bicycle. Everything planned, everything done, the
ticket bought, the clean gloves in the pocket.

How late the train was — waiting, waiting there.
Then the bursting carriages and all the passage ﬁlled
with soldiers — their tin hats, bottles, knapsacks
hitting on the walls when they turned. I wondered
how I could stand  I tried to sit down in the loop of a
strap, then on a ﬁre extinguisher. Sore, painful, I felt
desperate. How ill and tired I would be if I could not
sit down. I gazed at the fat suitcase for some time, then
at last I dared to sit down on it. Pleasure, bliss, gazing
out of the window, sitting down at last.

The ﬁelds, the feathery trees, wonderful poison
green, fresh as new lettuce. The large lonely young
man carrying a huge implement across unending

ACTIVITY 1.33

ﬁelds. Then the long, long tunnel with its whistle

and the belching white smoke, not escaping, ﬂowing
over the train in a thick cape. Sparks ﬂew and faded.
The red demon glow on the white smoke belchings
and the growing of it till I was really ready for some
catastrophe. Can something be on ﬁre? Will the
engine burst and the driver be burnt to death in the
steam, as I have read? Will I be groping in wreckage in
the dark tunnel? All this through my mind and more.
No change from early childhood. ‘

Then the sooted wall seen faintly, the lamps of
some workers, like miners’ lamps or the lamps of
gaolers in a dungeon. It is like a haunted house ...The
green, luminous skeleton should descend, champing
its terrible jaws, grinning. The concrete grime, then at
last the air, on, on. Quite happy now, almost peaceful.

From The Journals of Denton Welch.

Now write a short commentary on the passage. You could use the following
prompts to help you structure what you have to say:

The account begins briskly, almost matter-of—factly with routines such as 

 

 

Then, there is a change of mood as the writer recounts the physical aspects of
the journey 

After that, the description is laced with striking, often nightmarish images and
visions, as shown by 

39Cambridge International AS Level English Language

I look back and see Visions of my country as for
twenty-three years I have known it, peaceful,
blooming, full of abundance, its vast plain an ocean of
waving corn amongst which diligent peasants move
to and fro gathering in the harvest, the land’s dearest

pride.

I see its humble villages hidden amongst fruit
trees, I see the autumn splendour of its forests, I see
the grand solitude of its mountain summits, I see its
noble convents, corners of hidden beauty, treasures of
ancient art, I hear the sound of the shepherd’s horn,

N0

the sweet complaint of his ditties.

TIP

Remember not to organise
your answer around each
technique (e.g. a paragraph
on first person and then a
paragraph on the use of lists),
but work through the extract
in sections.

0 '0 C FURTHER READING

 

WNMMM“ we .ﬁ,+n,:a Va, ; a4.

 

M

Me
life

 

w read this somewhat different diary entry.

I see long roads with clouds of dust rising from
them, many carts in a ﬁle, I see gaily clad peasants
ﬂocking to market. I see naked plains and long
stretches of sand by the sea.

I also see our broad, proud Danube rolling its
many waters past quaint little villages and boroughs
inhabited by motley crowds of different nationalities,
past towns of which the rising industries are a promise
of future wealth. I see our port of Constanza with its
bustle, its noise and its hopes.

From the diaries onueen Marie of Romania.

ACTIVITY 1.34

1 Identify where and how the following techniques are used in this diary

extract:

I the use of the ﬁrst person, repeated in the same form of syntax and
sentence

I the sense of the writer’s voice

I how the writer also uses the present tense and what it tells us about the
past

I the use of lists of three
I the use of adjectives and verbs to create a certain kind of mood.

2 Now, referring to the techniques you have identiﬁed, write a short

commentary on this diary extract, ensuring that you use point/quotation/
comment and words and phrases like seems, appears, this suggests, this
implies.

emoirs and autobiographies

moirs and autobiographies are generally ﬁrst-person accounts of a real person’s
or of a speciﬁc time or event from their life.
All memoirs differ but most share common conventions such as:

reference to particularly memorable or vivid events or experiences that had an
impact on the life of the narrator

the evocation of past times or places, sometimes seen nostalgically, but also with
regret, gratitude, anger, etc.

the ‘bringing back to life’ of people or interesting characters from the past
reﬂection on one’s earlier life through adult eyes.

We..- “at _ , .