Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Organising the ideas
Once you have your basic ideas, you can begin to ﬁt them into an article format
One simple way to do this is to allocate paragraphs to the ideas you have
generated. So, for the task above, spider-diagram 1 2 paragraphs 1—2; diagram 2 g ‘
paragraphs 3—5; diagram 3 2 paragraphs 6—8 plus concluding paragraph. .
Typically, magazine or newspaper articles begin with the main facts in the early l
paragraphs. This isn’t a news story, but it would still make sense to mention the key .'
facts or issues in the ﬁrst paragraph. ‘
Decide whether the text type (if mentioned — e.g. letter, report, article) has a
‘typical’ structure to follow. If so, consider how your ideas might ﬁt into this. For

ACTIVITY 2.7

Discuss with a partner: example:

 
    
 
 

I What other ways are
there of organising this
content/information?
(e.g. Do you have to deal
with all the negatives in
the ﬁrst half and then the

positives in the second?)

Order I Focus/content

Paragraph 1 (introduction) Introduce topic/issue: mention the shop I run

 

Paragraph 2 More details: why I ended up with my own shop

Paragraph 3 Challenges 1—2: lack of experience, time to set up

Paragraph 4 Challenges 3—4: costs, advertising, problems with stock, etc.

  
 

Paragraph 5 Challenges 5—6: competition, very tiring

   

Paragragh 6 Rewards 1—2: being my own boss, happy customers
Rewards 3—4: business to hand over, etc.
Rewards 5—6 

Overview: has it been worth it?

Paragraph 7

2 KEY TERMS

Paragraph 8

 

Concluding paragraph

 

 

The plan, of course, does not tell you how to write or the language to use, but it

is implied by it. For example, the plan suggests introducing the topic, something
you would naturally do in a discursive article. This in turn implies what tense you
might use. For example:

 

People are opening small businesses in their thousands as I write. What is it
that drives people to start working for themselves? After all, there are many
risks and the beneﬁts aren’t always obvious. This is something I know only too
well, as the owner of small convenience store on the edge of a large city.

ACTIVITY 2.8

1 Choose any paragraph from the plan (except for the ﬁnal one) and draft
what you would write.
When you have ﬁnished, evaluate how easy it was to write with the plan
to refer to.

 

 

 

2 Now try planning and generating ideas for this new task:

  
     
   
     

  

TIP

There are lots of ways to
structure and organise
articles and reports — think
about how the order can help
you achieve your purpose.

A magazine aimed at the over 505 publishes an article called Nothing to
Fear. The article tries to persuade readers that technology (such as computers,
tablets and smartphones) and the internet can bring beneﬁts to their

lives. Write the article (600—900 words). In your writing, create a sense of
enthusiasm and practical advice.

. mew/11 .

 

Wﬂawwmw- rllin

pla.

dith

No‘

for“

pas
W
on,

search online for ‘essay
rs' you will see a range of

n1 templates and diagrams.

I otthem will be suitable
work, but you might ﬁnd
altar planners that suit

on way of working and
using material.

Part 1

:v “.4251

 

Spend ten minutes planning your response.

I Stage 1: list the key words or phrases in the task that tell you text type,
purpose, mood/tone, etc.

I Stage 2: use a diagram or other ‘idea shower’ (e.g. a list) to get ideas for
the main content (e.g. beneﬁts of technology)

I Stage 3: brieﬂy, organise your ideas/points into a set of eight to ten
paragraphs (or more, if you wish).

Once you have done this, compare your ‘Stage 3’ plan with a partner’s.
Is there anything you could have improved? If so, what?

Further practice

As already noted, a good plan/structure will vary according to the task and the text
type. Apply the same planning process to the following task.

A travel companypublishes its new brochure describing in detail the locations it
oﬁers visits to. The promotion outlines thejourney and the attractions and qualities
ofeach place. Write the textfor one ofthese locations. In your writing, create a
sense ofa pleasurable and once—in—a—lzfetime experience.

Summa ry
Remember these key points from this section:

It is important to use the title/task to generate key ideas.
Plan your writing carefully, considering the order and sequence of information.

Different text types will imply different focuses for each paragraph or section of
text.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Text types and purposes

In this section, you will:

I review the main writing types and purposes
I consider their conventions and key features
I apply them appropriately to set tasks.

For both directed writing tasks and audience—speciﬁc writing it is important that
you are familiar with the different types and purposes of writing that you may
be required to use. These types and purposes imply particular conventions and
language features, but they will also sometimes combine styles, literary devices
and structures.

What are the key text types and purposes?

From your work on Unit 1 you have already become familiar with some of the
different types of writing and purposes you may meet in an examination Situation;

descriptive writing (in texts such as travel articles or accounts)
personal writing (in texts such as autobiographies, diaries and letters)
writing about others (in texts such as biography and memoirs)

persuasive, discursive or argumentative writing (in texts such as news or
magazine features, speeches, promotional brochures or leaﬂets and reviews).

"lhe purposes such texts and forms suggest are widespread, but might be to inform,
- explain, describe, reﬂect (on experiences), discuss or explore, comment, review,
76

persuade, argue a case, or promote an idea.

ACTIVITY 2.9

Discuss with a partner:

I What do you think the main writing purposes are in the following forms
of text? (There may be several, but think about the key focus each is likely
to have.)

— a campaign speech from a politician hoping to win an election
— an account by a war reporter of conditions inside a refugee camp
— an article about the pros and cons of providing free childcare.

 

Throughout this unit, you may find it helpful to look back at Unit 1 for examples of the
different types of writing and formats you have studied.

Letters

In an examination situation you may be asked to write:

I either a section of a letter for a shorter directed writing task based on a passage
you have read (120—150 words)

I or two contrasting letters (300—450 words each) when asked to write for a
speciﬁed audience.Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

 

Whether your letter is formal or informal, it should look like this on the page (this
is an informal example):

f 15 Pine Boulevard,
Mytown,

East Province
EP1 MY3

Write the main body of your letter here.

 

 

 

 

Best wishes,
Carlos

Lei—5

77

 

vw my.“ waart; rm‘gw">-hrwgm/VV-«t-wguMW-aﬁzmm‘ﬁl'mm _ , , ,_ mmmmmwmmwmwwwwmmvww , ,

 

 

l
r
l
l

 

Remember: use a capital letter at the start of each line of the address and make sure

(sloping inwards to the right). The close of the letter can be chosen from a range of
possible options such as Best wishes, Yours truly, Regards and so on.
If the letter is formal there are some differences:

I the address of the intended reader should be placed on the left—hand side of the
letter below the level of the sender’s address (which is on the right—hand side)

I if the title and surname of the intended reader is known, the letter should begin
Dear Mrs Gonzalez or Dear Mr Manzoor.

I if the name of the intended reader is not known, the opening of the letter should
be either Dear Sir or Dear Madam if the gender is known; if the gender is not
known, Dear Sir or Madam is used

I the close of a letter where the name of the intended reader is known should be
Yours sincerely (followed by a comma) followed legibly by the sender’s name

I the close of a formal letter where the reader’s name is not known should be
Yours faithfully (followed by a comma) followed legibly by the sender’s name
I the opening paragraph should generally state the purpose of the letter.

Read the following extract in which the writer describes her experience of Visiting
Antarctica and meeting her colleague, Martin, for whom she develops feelings. As
you read, think about elements from the teXt that you might be able to re—use in a
follow—up task.We both wore seasick patches, were both vaguely
dissatisﬁed with our jobs, wanted to write books. We
would stand on deck in the early hours of the morning
and watch auroras like giant scribbles of moving light
in the sky, and talk endlessly of lives we didn’t lead and
most likely never would, of what we would do when we
got back. How we’d ﬁnally have the courage to do what
we really wanted to. It all seemed possible down there.

In the daytime there were icebergs that looked
like pool tables or Cambodian temples or Walt Disney
castles or Ulurul, some so blue it was as if the ice had
trapped a piece of the sky. We stood on the bow as the
ocean changed around us from open sea to water like
heaving marble with long veins of white through it.

One morning there were frozen pancakes of ice with
their edges kicked up, an ocean of severed ears. Over
the days the ears changed to huge waterlilies of ice, then
oblong chunks 20m across, then vast sheets, ice—rink
sized.

On the ice chunks were seals and their blood — it was
the pupping season and there were many births. There
were penguins that scurried in a panic. In the channels
between ﬂoes were minke whales, their backs breaking
the surface in a stately arc. And circling around the
Aurora were snow petrels soaring and dipping like
hundreds of angels watching over us.

Martin was contemptuous of the voyagers who
spent most of their time in the video room in the bowels
of the ship.

“Some of them haven’t seen daylight since we left
Hobart. They live in a world of virtual darkness. Maybe
they’re acclimatising themselves to 24-hour darkness
in winter, but no one has told them that they’re going
down in summer.”

There were 300 videos on the ship, it took ﬁve
weeks to sail from Hobart to Davis, and by the end of
the fourth week, the video-heads were so bored they
weren’t fast—forwarding through the previews any more.

“I feel so alive in this place,” Martin laughed in
vivid contrast, exhausting me with the ferocity of his
enthusiasm. He was 37, the age of reckoning as we
career into middle age, and he was gulping this world

Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

like a gleeful boy. He said that we must live differently
after this trip, do all the things we really wanted to do.

He was constantly dragging me up on deck to
seize the light, the sky, the ocean. One day I forgot
my special—issue sunglasses, but didn’t care because
I wanted to see unﬁltered all the different shades of
white around us, but then I got snow blindness like a
thick ﬁlm of milk over my eyes. It took me three days to
recover and from then on I always wore my sunglasses;
Martin made sure of it. He made sure of many things.

That our lives would change after this voyage, they
must. That they would veer from their prescribed
course like an ocean liner heading off to unknown
climes.

The Aurora sailed up an avenue of icebergs and
cracked the sea’s skin to within 3km of the coastal
station, but could crack it no further. The ship parked
by a line of drums on the frozen surface by a two—lane
highway bulldozed freshly in the ice for the cargo
operations to start. The gangplank was lowered and we
walked or skied the last leg, across the surface of the
Great Southern Ocean, to the continent.

Tears pricked my eyes with the sheer monumental
emotion of it all.

Davis Station was a scattered collection of brightly
coloured buildings that looked like large shipping
containers. “Legoland”, it was dubbed. The Australian
mainland was “the real world”. I wanted to leave the
real world far behind, drown myself in this brave new
existence, so vulnerable and lonely and exhilarating
and replenishing, in the vastness of this unsullied
continent...

I didn’t want to leave this place. Didn’t want to go
back to my cluttered, inner—city life. Didn’t want to
leave Martin. He had entered my heart, was riveted to
it, the relationship sanctiﬁed by the shared wonder of
this land. But he was staying behind, his work wasn’t
ﬁnished. As we said goodbye our cheeks felt like plastic.

From Antarctica, A Voyage into Unknown Climes
by Nikki Gemmell.

1 Uluru also known as Ayers Rock

Now read this directed writing task:

On his return to land, Martin realises he does not completely share the writer’s
feelings about their relationship or their possiblefuture. He writes a hriefletter to
a relative to express his thoughts andfeelings. Basingyour answer closely on the
material of the original extract, write a section ofthe letter (120-150 words).TIP

For the first task, base
your letter on the passage.

Forthe second, spend 10

to 15 minutes planning
your answer using the
process you learned about
in the previous section of
this unit.

 

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

A example response might be as follows:

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

31, Smith Square,
Hobart,
Tasmania

4GH X29

18th July
Dear Mother,
Both she and thisjourney drove me mad with boredom.

Every day I hauled her up onto the deck to try to find things to occupy
thejourney. Anything rather than sit watching videos like the rest of the
crew. We wasted quite a lot of time till late at night pointlessly looking
at the stars, conversations going back into the past trailing things up
that didn’t matter anymore. Most days she encouraged me do the same
things in the morning, such as making me stare out into the blank white
horizon where there is nothing to see,just endless water and blobs of
floating ice. i suppose it’s beautiful in a way, but terribly colourless. Then
i had to look after her when she didn’t follow my advice about wearing
sunglasses. i want to be out on the ice, doing things, not watching them
 which is why i’m staying on. I need this time alone now

Besides, I’ve still got a book to finish.

All my love,
Martin

ACTIVITY 2.10

1

In what way is this is a good answer?

'lhink about the sense of voice (has the writer captured a different
perspective?)

Does it make use of material from the original text?

Is the language and layout appropriate to a letter to his mother?

Select one of these two tasks to complete. The ﬁrst is a short task in
response to the passage; the second a longer ‘writing for a speciﬁed
audience’ task.

A

Imagine you are another traveller on the same trip. Write a brief letter
to a friend describing your feelings as a person travelling alone without
someone to share the landscape and voyage with. Base your letter closely
on material from the passage.

Write two letters to a travel company who run luxury summer cruises
. to islands in the Caribbean, or similar. In theﬁrst letter, you havejust

79Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

 

returnedfrom the trip and Want to express how enjoyable it was and

To practise your skills, take what made it so special; in the second letter, writefrom the point ofview
another teXt from this unit, for ofanother traveller whofound the cruise unsatisfactory, giving his/her
example the amide about rOCk reasons. You should write between 300 and 400 wordsfor each letter.

concerts on page 86’ and WHte (Do not base this on the passage!)
a letter from the author to a

friend or relative expressing
her frustration about people’s
behaviour. Or choose any other Diaries
‘non~letter’ text and invent a
recipient.

In an exam situation you may be asked to write a single diary entry or a series of
entries (120—150 words) for directed writing questions.
Diaries are often:

I written in a time of crisis or as a way of recording personal, often reﬂective,

thoughts
TIP I written in a conﬁdential tone: the writer of the diary is often recording very
Ta ke care OVer “Sing private thoughts about herself or himself, meant for the writer’s eyes alone

abbréylatedforms  n thls km I written usmg a mm of present, future and past tense forms to express how the
of writing: diary writers do

not always use full sentences writer has felt about past events, is feeling at that time, and to set out what he or
all the time and may miss out She might do next.
words or employ phrases as

a form of diary shorthand.
However, it must be clear to

Look again at the passage by George Orwell on pages 9—10. Now read this question
for a directed writing task.

your reader What the intended One ofthe crowd, who has been watching events, returns home and writes an entry
meaning Of the diary entry is' in her diary. In it, she describes her thoughts andfeelings about what she has seen.
Basingyour answer closely on the material ofthe original extract, write a section
(120—150 words) ofthe entry.

ACTIVITY 2.11

Write your response to this task. Make sure you have thought about the key
elements of the task (e.g. whose perspective you are writing from).

 

Remember to:

I capture the changing voice and mood of the narrator as the piece
progresses — you could draw on memories that come out as you watched
the shooting, or that come to you later

I use ‘typical’ diary language — such as the use of incomplete sentences, or a
mix of present and past tenses  ‘

I use descriptive language to convey the horror and pity of the situation

I use a variety of sentence structures to show changes in attitude, for
example a sudden short sentence to switch focus from one person or
memory to another.

0 i 3 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

x 1.» mmmwrmymm

Discuss with a partner which
Ofthese autobiographical
Imemories you would ﬁnd

most engaging to read:

Catching the bus to
school when I was young
I Watching the battle
between a mongoose and
a snake in my backyard

I Howl got to know my
grandfather who had not
spoken to me for years

I feel fragile and glassy.

Outside the rain is falling down and tattooing on
the Arrivals Hall. I feel like the next person to jostle
me is going to fracture me into a million serrated
splinters. I feel so delicate that any moment I am going
to cascade spectacularly across this Arrivals Hall at
Natira Airport and leave behind a trail of detritus
seventeen time zones wide. I just hope that someone
Will sweep up the fragments and ship them home to

my son.

The queue shufﬂes forward a fraction.

 

Part 1

 

In an examination situation you may be asked to write:

either a section (120—150 words) of an autobiography or a memoir
or an extended piece (600—900 words).

Autobiographies and memoirs are ways in which people assess and recount past
events that have had an impact on them, or in which particular people they have
met or known have made an impression.

Generally speaking, in autobiographies or memoirs you will need to:

write in the ﬁrst person

convey the sense of an intense experience or event, rather than a simple
narrative or recording of routine everyday occurrences.

Some directed writing tasks may ask you to produce a piece of writing based either
on the style and language or on the material of text extracts. 'lhe type of writing
and the speciﬁc format (such as an autobiography or diary) will vary.

Read this text about the writer waiting at an airport in Japan.

 

The Arrivals Hall used to be my favourite place
in Japan. Everything I love about Japan can be seen
contained in this small area. There are Dowager
Empresses in silky kimonos, school girls in tartan
mini—skirts and big-socks, salary men leaning on
No Smoking signs whilst pufﬁng on ﬁlter-less Lark
cigarettes, Buddhist monks, with shaved heads,
resplendent in purple robes and worried looking
mothers dabbing their brows with lacy handkerchiefs
and fretting about their lives slipping by. I used to
love getting off the plane and thinking: My god,

0Alice is through the looking glass again. But today,
after crossing the Paciﬁc, I just feel like bits of me are
rubbing against themselves trying to make some kind
of unlikely connection. I need to emotionally ground
myself but it seems hard to do. I am standing on the
edge of a chasm of fear and longing.

I am also desperately searching for a pregnant

woman.
The queue shufﬂes forward a fraction more. The

helpful marker post tells me that I should be at the
immigration desk within several hours. I wonder why
no—one has hung prayer ﬂags on the markers the way
walkers pile rocks on cairns in the Highlands.

Japan emphasises my inherent loneliness. Each
time I come here it affects me more profoundly and
I ﬁnd myself questioning, continuously, who I am.
Maybe the jet—lag I suffer or the sheer, gut-wrenching
level of frustration which comes from working with a
Japanese company. Or perhaps after all these years, I
do really want to conform and be a part of something
greater than myself, which sends my head reeling.
People all around me are living their lives whilst mine
seems a vague world of shadows and emptiness.

We shufﬂe forward a few paces. I ﬁnish the ﬁrst
half of War and Peace.1

The young couple in front of me have just returned
from their ﬁrst trip to the States. To kill time, because

ACTIVITY 2.13

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

today time is something we all have in excess, I try to
draw them into conversation. Slowly, shyly, carefully '_
they come them out of themselves and begin talking  I
about their trip. They are beautifully shy, painfully
self—conscious and wonderfully conservative. They
visited something like seventy—four cities in six days.
Their heads are still spinning but they are pleased to
be home. After much prodding and gentle questioning
they tell me that the most surprising thing for them
was that you could eat McDonald’s in America. I ask
if they realise that McDonald’s is an American
company and they blush sweetly and look at their
shoes. After a little more prodding they produce

a mega-pixel digital camera and show me snaps of
them enjoying a meal under the Golden-Arches. They
typify modern Japan: charmingly naive but with a
rough techno edge.

We shufﬂe forward a few more paces, and I think:
Even death must be more pleasurable than this. If I  r
squint I can just make out the front of the queue. It’s 
just beyond the curve of the earth. By the time I reach ‘
the front I will probably be a grandfather and my
passport will have expired.

From A Fragile Gaijin in Japan by Philip Blazdell.

1 War and Peace an epic novel by Leo Tolstoy

In an examination situation, you may already have written a commentary on
the text, so the style/language should be fairly clear to you. However, for the
purpose of this practice, discuss these questions in a small group, and then
make notes about each one for yourself:

I What sense do you get of the writer’s attitude to his situation? (Is it

consistent? Does it change or develop in any way?)

I What particular things and people does he describe? What language 9
techniques does he use?

I How would you describe his tone? (Mocking? Sad? Angry? Thoughtful?
Hopeful? Isolated? Lonely? Or a combination of these, plus other things?)

Now read this directed writing task:

Later, the writerpuhlishes afurther account about a diﬁerent location where he also
neededpatience. Write a section (120—150 words) ofthe account. Base your answer
closely on the style and language ofthe original extract.

Here is a possible sample response to this task.ACTIVITY 2.14

Using the same title and

the original extract, write a
section of another account
(120—150 words) ofa
different location the writer
might have visited, one in
which patience was required.

 

Turn to page 125 in Unit 3 for
more on writing about Setting
and location.

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

The sun is beating down on the bus shelter and thundering on the roof,
drumming into my frail and distant brain.

The crowd edges forward an inch.

The shelter in London was a cherished memory for me. All that l
admired about the place is encapsulated in this microcosm. Here I can
see city gents in smart black suits, bent old ladies clinging on to their
faded bags, teenagers in hooded jackets with tattooed faces and large
black boots, shouting loudly into microscopic mobile phones.

The crowd shambles on.

The welcoming bus stop ahead informs me that i will reach boarding
point before dawn.

The crowd reinforces my sense of isolation, drawing a cloak of black
gloom around me. Even a hospital must be better than this. I scan the
horizon for a sign. it will be the next century before the bus arrives.

|.I.l
V)
Z
O
D.
U)
m
0:
Lu
.1
D.
2
<
V)

 

Here are some good points about this response in terms of the original
extract:

COMMENT

I there is a sense of oppression (beating down  thundering black
gloom)

there is a sense of loneliness in a crowd (isolation)
there is a sense of slowness (repeated reference to crowd movement)

there is a sense of sarcasm (I will reach boarding point before dawn 
It will be the next century before the bus arrives)

I there is similar use of past and present tenses.

Further practice

Extended writing: as part of descriptive or imaginative writing (see Unit 3) you
might have to write a longer piece about arriving at a location.

Write two contrastingpieces (300—400 words each) about a memory ofarrival at a
place. In theﬁrstpiece, writefrom the point ofview ofa youngerperson arriving; in
the second piece, writefrom the point ofview of the adult or olderperson who was
waitingfor them.

Here, you will have to invent your own style and language around the theme.
However, you can draw on some of the skills used in the sample passage and
response to give a sense of voice and perspective on emotions, surroundings, the
person they are meeting/waiting for, etc.

Biography and character portraits

In an examination situation you may be asked to write:

I either a section (120—150 words) of a biography or a character portrait
I or an extended piece (600—900 words).

Biographical writing is a form of writing in which a writer focuses on the life or
character of someone interesting. This might be a famous or infamous person, or
someone close to them whom they believe will be of interest to the reader.

3

83