Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

ACTIVITY 1.35

Write a short passage about your own life recalling an experience or event
from when you were very young. Try to evoke what you felt then, as a child,
and how you look at the same event now as an older person.

You need not share this work with anyone, as it may be something you
would prefer to keep private. However, keep in mind the skills you had to
deploy in writing it as you read the accounts that follow.

Writers may express their thoughts and feelings in memoirs and autobiographies,
often relying on descriptive language to convey the sense of a particular location in
which their experience occurred.

Memoirs tend to focus on a particular memory or heightened experience in the
author’s life. For example, the text below the photo is not a diary entry about war,
but a memoir recalling a very dramatic experience in the writer’s time as a soldier.
The external world he found himself in seemed to encapsulate his intense feelings at
the time.

A British trench during the Battle of
the Somme.

41

ACTIVITY 1.36

Look at the extract

below. List key words and
phrases from the passage.
Are there any you could
group together or link by
a particular mood? For
example, wonderful and
peaceful would be in a
different mood category
from agonised.

 

Beside, something wonderful was happening outside. last, I mean, before we went over the top — another

Some evenings before, I had watched with some miracle was being worked.

friends from a peaceful little butte1 some miles It was a glorious morning, and, as though there

behind our front the opening hours of the great were some mysterious sympathy between the wonders

bOmbardment. We had seen it from above, beneath a of the ear and of the eye, the bewildering tumult

slowly sinking sun, as a long white line of surf breaking seemed to grow more insistent with the growing

Without pause on a shore that faded at its extremities brilliance of the atmosphere and the intenser blue

into horizons beyond our sight, and had marveled of the July sky. The sound was different, not only in

that, by some trick of the ground, not a Whisper from magnitude, but in quality, from anything known

that aWe—inspiring racket reached us. NOW, at the to me. It was not a succession of explosions or a

tremendous climax of the last hour of the inferno — the continuous roar; l, at least, never heard either a gun or
0Cambridge International AS Level English Language

a bursting shell. It was not a noise; it was a symphony.
It did not move; it hung over us. It was as though the
air were full of a vast and agonized passion, bursting
now into groans and sighs, now into shrill screams and
pitiful whimpers, shuddering beneath terrible blows,
torn by unearthly whips, vibrating with the solemn
pulse of enormous wings. And the supernatural tumult
did not pass in this direction or that. It did not begin,
intensify, decline, and end. It was poised in the air,

a stationary panorama of sound, a condition of the
atmosphere, not the creation of man. It seemed that
one had only to lift one’s eyes to be appalled by the
writhing of the tormented element above one, that a
hand raised ever so little above the level of the trench
would be sucked away into a whirlpool revolving with
cruel and incredible velocity over inﬁnite depths.

And this feeling, while it ﬁlled one with awe, ﬁlled

one also with triumphant exultation, the exultation of
struggling against a storm in mountains, or watching
the irresistible course of a swift and destructive river.

1 butte a small hill

 

Yet at the same time one was intent on practical
details, wiping the trench dirt off the bolt of one’s riﬂe,
reminding the men of what each was to do, and when
the message went round, “ﬁve minutes to go,” seeing
that all bayonets were ﬁxed. My captain, a brave man
and a good ofﬁcer, came along and borrowed a spare
watch off me. It was the last time I saw him. At 7:30 we
went up the ladders, doubled through the gaps in the
wire, and lay down, waiting for the line to form up on
each side of us. When it was ready we went forward,
not doubling, but at a walk. For we had nine hundred
yards of rough ground to the trench which was our
ﬁrst objective, and about ﬁfteen hundred to a further
trench where we were to wait for orders. There was
a bright light in the air, and the tufts of coarse grass
were gray with dew.

I hadn’t gone ten yards before I felt a load fall
from me.

From TheAttack by R. H. Tawney.

Key technique: grouping words and phrases

Look at how grouping words and phrases together by mood can help make sense
of the passage. ’lhe following diagram shows how one set of words and phrases has

been linked.

peaceful

marvelled

  

awe-inspiring

 
 
 
   
 
 
 

another miracle

  

glorious morning

 

beauty, calm
and an almost
religious
atmosphere

wonders of the ear

and of the eye

 

 
    

growing brilliance

intenser blue ofthe
July sky

 

  

it was a symphony

  
 
   

triumphant exultationUnit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

w

, Now do the same for the aspect shown below. Copy 2 Once you have completed the diagram, write a
1 and complete the diagram, ﬁnding as many words or paragraph on that particular aspect. Select three or
Phrases as you can. four words from the diagram and, in your paragraph, {

comment on them and the effects created.

    

great bombardment

 

a sense of 1

menance, .

horror and ; I
noise '

 

 

43

 

Further practice

Notice how towards the end of the extract, where the writer refers to how one was
intent on practical detail, the rest of the passage seems to change in style and mood.
Write a sentence explaining how and why this happens.

Characters in memoirs

Writers of memoirs and autobiographies sometimes use descriptive language to
portray a certain location as a way of telling us about a particular character who
m lives there and their own reactions to the world in which they ﬁnd themselves.
When we speak about ‘character’ what we are really talking about are the

Make a list of key words and various elements that contribute to the ‘picture’ of someone. These might include:
phrases in the extract on

page 44 to explore what the
language and style imply
about the character of the
writer’s godmother.

their appearance

what they say and do

what others say to them, about them, etc.
how others respond to them

the circumstances or locations they are found in.

Places as reﬂections of character are very common in both ﬁction and non-ﬁction.
This is most obviously the case when the place is the home of the person described.

ﬂCambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

For example, the following extract describes the place where the writer’s
godmother (Stella) lives in India.

The houses all had high ceilings and sloping roofs made
of corrugated asbestos that monsoon rains would drum
on, then slide off in vertical lines. (Once in a while,
during a storm, milk-heavy coconuts or even an entire
head of a coconut tree would crash through a roof amid
torrents of water.) All the houses had a sense of space,
light and circulating air, with open porches. Long ﬂat
windows set high under the roofs made frames for
swirling palm fronds against sky. Lower down, there
were windows with black panes, rectangular bars, and
white wooden shutters. The doors to all the houses were
always open, except for the hours of sleep at night.
Stella’s open door, though, did not mean free
visitation rights. “Stella doesn’t like children” was an
adage that I grew up with. There were occasions when
we were formally taken over to visit Stella, scrubbed
and brushed and admonished to be on best behavior.
Otherwise, we observed Stella from afar: through
hedges, across porches, from the other ends of gardens,
or even by actually creeping into her own well—tended
garden when the air hung heavy with afternoon siestas

Stella’s house — so similar with its white walls and

high windows — seemed dreamily opulent. An entire
table was often set aside for a jigsaw puzzle she was
working on, at her own speed, with no one to tell her
to pick it up. She read the latest expensive books with
glossy covers. On the walls, or simply hanging from
lines, were the latest black and white pictures she had
developed: beach patterns, jungle ruins, animals from
temple friezes, interesting looking people. The servants,
Zachariah and Raghu, in their white uniforms, exuded
faint disapproval at us, the raggle—taggle ensemble. It
was at Stella’s house that I would feel the most acutely
that my mother did not remember to trim or groom, let
alone paint, her toe—nails.

If we were invited for tea, we were served on china
that had belonged to Stella’s mother. The delicate plates,
saucers and cups had ﬂoral patterns in brown and black
along the edges. We were given little forks with shell
handles. In an early memory I have of such an occasion,
I must have been about four. Whoever was beside me —
my grandmother, or mother or elder sister Maya —— was

 

.. 4... v, .wwﬂwwwu _; .....

of adults...

“Going over to Stella’s” was an occasion that came
twice or thrice a year. Coming from our house, with
too many children and never quite enough money,

trying to make sure that I ate leaning forward towards
the glass-topped table without sending that precious
china crashing to the ﬂoor.

From Stella in Bombay by Kirin Naravan.

Key technique: characterisation through setting

You may have noticed how the writer creates a sense of freedom (had a sense of
space, light and circulating air, with open porches) and the way in which a sense of
order is suggested (flat windows set high under the roofs madeframesfor swirling
palmfronds against sky).

The interior world seems to offer a sense of regularity and protection from the
intrusion of the wilder elements of the outside world, an idea echoed in the way
that the roofs would make the threatening rain then slide oﬁin vertical lines. Such
a sense of an ordered and safe world is echoed by the description of how there were
windows with black panes, rectangular bars, and white wooden shutters.

ACTIVITY 1.39

Having read the explanation about characterisation above, and the extract as
a whole, discuss with a partner:

TIP

An unusual or older character
~ often a relative — can be

represented in memoirs or
autobiographies by the writer
creating a sense of mystery
and offering no real narrative.

 

‘ KEY TERMS I What might the description of the location suggest about its occupant?
»_ N I I What do we learn about the children’s thoughts about their grandmother
from the descriptions of the location? (For example, why the words black

and white are repeated and what this suggests.)

 

6Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

MY
from. I ree

was anxious for him to remember.

Ipestered him for days. He told me to stop
bothering him and that he would remember. Or stop
bothering or else he would not remember. I hovered
about him in any room in which he rested. I followed
him around asking him if he wanted me to do this or
that for him, clean his glasses, polish his shoes, bring

‘ his tea. I studied him intently when he came home.
I searched the grey bristles of his moustache for any
ﬂicker which might suggest he was about to speak. He
raised his Sunday Guardian newspaper to block my
View. He shooed me away, telling me to ﬁnd some book
to read or work to do. At times it seemed as if Papa was

grandfather said he knew what people we came
led off all the names I knew. Yoruba? Ibo?
Ashanti? Mandingo? He said no to all ofthem, saying
that he would know it ifhe heard it. I was thirteen. I

The next extract describes another writer’s attempts to work out her identity and
origins.

I scoured the San Fernando library and found
no other lists of names at the time. Having no way of
ﬁnding other names, I could only repeat the ones I
knew, asking him if he was sure it wasn’t Yoruba, how
about Ashanti? I couldn’t help myself. I wanted to be
either one. I had heard that they were noble people.
But I could also be Ibo; I had heard that they were
gentle. And I had followed the war in Biafra. I was on
their side.

Papa never remembered. Each week he came I
asked him had he remembered. Each week he told
me no. Then I stopped asking. He was disappointed.
I was disappointed. We lived after that in this mutual
disappointment. It was a rift between us. It gathered
into a kind of estrangement. After that he grew old. I
grew young. A small space opened in me.

From A Map to the Door ofNo Return by Dionne Brand.

on the brink of remembering. I imagined pulling the
word off his tongue if only I knew the ﬁrst syllable.

2 KEY TERMS

    

Can you ﬁnd further
examples of the techniques
Of short sentences,
syntactical patterns and

repetitions in the text by
Dionne Brand?

45

ACTIVITY 1.40

' Highlight key words and phrases in this extract. Then discuss with a partner
what we learn about the grandfather and the narrator’s perspective towards
him. '

The ﬁrst person usage (I) keeps the focus on the narrator throughout, but there are
other aspects and techniques you might have identiﬁed:

l lists of three (clean his glasses, polish his shoes, bring his tea) to create a sense of
everything the writer does in a frustrated attempt to please her grandfather

I repeated syntactical structures such as I hovered about him... I followed him...
in order to create the sense of perseverance and repetitive obsession of the
author’s search

I short sentences and repeated vocabulary as a way of expressing the limited
amount of progress she made and the sense of an ongoing routine that prevents
any possible progress being made (Papa never remembered. Each week he came I
asked him had he remembered. Each week he told me no.)

I a sense of voice expressed by conveying her inner thoughts.

 

Drawing conclusions about people from the settings or locations is something you can
apply toa range of texts. Look back at the extract from Touching the Void on page 21.
What does the environment, and the narrator’s response to it, tell us about him?Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

third person singular She or The memoirs and autobiographies you have analysed so far in this section have
he been written in ﬁrst person. Writers of these types of texts may also choose to write
in  gases; sirrgtéiar in order to distance themselves from their subject.

For example, the writer may adopt the voice of a child to convey how she or he
was feeling (rather than the events which were happening around them) at certain
points of their upbringing.

Read this autobiographical account in which a South African writer looks back
to a time earlier in his career when he visited London, aspiring to become a poet.

The British Museum Library Reading
Room.

ACTIVITY 1.42

By listing key words and
phrases in this extract,
explore the use of present
tense, voice and expression 1
of inner thoughts in the ﬁrst
two paragraphs.

It is three o’clock on a Saturday afternoon. He has
been in the Reading Room since opening time,
reading Ford’s Mr Humpty Dumpty, a novel so tedious
that he has to ﬁght to stay awake. In a short While the
Reading Room Will close for the day, the whole great
Museum will close. On Sundays the Reading Room
does not open; between now and next Saturday,
reading Will be a matter of an hour snatched here and
there of an evening. Should he soldier on until closing
time, though he is racked with yawns? What is the
point of this enterprise anyway?

What is the good to a computer programmer, if
computer programming is to be his life, to have an MA
in English literature? And Where are the unrecognised
masterpieces that he was going to uncover? Mr
Humpty Dumpty is certainly not one of them. He shuts
the book, packs up.

Outside the daylight is already waning. Along
Great Russell Street he trudges t0 Tottenham Court

 

 

Road, then south toward Charing Cross. Of the throng
on the sidewalks, most are young people. Strictly
speaking he is their contemporary, but he does not feel
like that. He feels middle-aged, prematurely middle-
aged: one ofthose bloodless, high-domed, exhausted
scholars Whose skin ﬂakes at the merest touch. Deeper
than that he is still a child ignorant of his place in the
world, frightened, indecisive. What is he doing in

this huge, cold city Where merely to stay alive means
holding tight all the time, trying not to fall?

The bookshops on Charing Cross Road stay open
until six. Until six he has somewhere to go. After that
he will be adrift amid the Saturday—night fun—seekers.
For a While he can follow the ﬂow, pretending he too
is seeking fun, pretending he has somewhere to go,
someone to meet; but in the end he Will have to give

up and catch the train back to Archway station and the
solitude of his room.

From Lostin London by J.M.Coetzee.