120

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

We tend to assume
characterisation is limited to
fictional works but it can often
be applied to non—fiction texts,
too. Look back at the extract
from Touching the Void on page
21 of Unit 1. in what ways could
Joe Simpson be said to be
using characterisation to paint
a picture of himself in terms

of his behaviour, thoughts,
observations, etc.?

: KEYTERMSV

 

@ LiNK

it is often said of Nick Carraway, the narrator of The Great Gatsby, that he is unreliable
in terms of his perception of events and people, including Gatsby himself. You could
look at the extract from the novel on page 000 to see if this is true, but for a proper
sense of it read the opening two chapters of the novel yourself.

 

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Consider carefully the role of the narrator in texts you read and how what they
say ‘positions’ us as readers.

I Explore in your own writing the multiple possibilities of narrative mode,
whether ﬁrst, second or third person, and think about the effect of that
choice.

I Think about the effect of different types of unreliable narration and what that
might add to your own writing.

I Consider how the balance between inner thought, outer action and speech can
be deployed to reveal — or hide — what you want to say.

Characterisation
In this section, you will:

I read a range of texts introducing you to a variety of characters
I learn what characterisation is and how it is created
I create your own characters in preparation for more extended writing.

What is characterisation?

Characterisation is the methods and devices a writer uses in order to build a
convincing character. These may include: i

I physical appearance and clothing

I behaviour towards others — general attitude and speciﬁc acts (these might
include anecdotes or examples of the character’s past actions)

what the character says

what others say about the character

how others behave towards him/ her

the location he or she is placed in, or which reﬂects them in some way

what we know, or are told, about the character’s personal circumstances (family,
friends, job, history, etc.)

I and, sometimes, the circumstances of his or her ﬁrst and last appearance in a
text.

However, if a writer were merely to follow this list and provide the details in a form
of catalogue or list of bullet points, it would mean very little. How the writer reveals
this information is as important as what is revealed.

Read the following extract which gives us some very direct information about
the protagonist, a tribal leader in Africa.Unit 3: Imaginative writing

 

The drums beat and the ﬂutes sang and the spectators
held their breath. Amalinze was a wily craftsman,

but Okonkwo was as slippery as a ﬁsh in water. Every
nerve and every muscle stood out on their arms,

on their backs and their thighs, and one almost

heard them stretching to breaking point. In the end,
Okonkwo threw the Cat. That was many years ago,
twenty years or more, and during this time Okonkwo’s
fame had grown like a bush—ﬁre.

Okonkwo was well known throughout the nine
villages and even beyond. His fame rested on solid
personal achievements. As a young man of eighteen
he had brought honor to his village by throwing
Amalinze the Cat. Amalinze was the great wrestler
who for seven years was unbeaten, from Umuoﬁa to
Mbaino. He was called the Cat because his back would
never touch the earth. It was this man that Okonkwo
threw in a ﬁght which the old men agreed was one of
the ﬁercest since the founder of their town engaged

a spirit of the wild for seven days and seven nights.

ACTIVITY 3.11

Make your own notes on the following:

From Things FallApart by Chinua Achebe.

I Which of the characterisation devices listed above are included here?

I We are told quite a lot in this passage but there is no ‘story’ as such. It is
simply a description of how a character got to be where he is at this point.
What might you expect to happen from this point to make a story?

Showing not telling

One of the key skills writers use is to show characters in action, rather than
telling us about them. This is effective at all times in stories but at the beginning
,of the narrative it can also have the effect of raising questions in our mind, and of
withholding or implying factual details.

Read the following extract from Lord of the Flies. It is in almost direct contrast
to the previous extract in that we are told almost nothing about the character or the
facts of his situation, but shown a great deal.

The boy with the fair hair lowered himself down the last few feet of rock and
began to pick his way towards the lagoon. Though he had taken off his school
sweater and trailed it now from one hand, his grey shirt stuck to him and his
hair was plastered to his forehead. All round him the long scar smashed into
the jungle was a bath of heat. He was clambering heavily among the creepers
when a bird, a vision of red and yellow, ﬂashed upwards with a witch—like cry;
and this cry was echoed by another.

From Lord ofthe Flies by William Golding.

ACTIVITY 3.12

1 Discuss with a partner:

I what do we learn about the boy? (Think about his physical appearance
and his actions.)

I what do we learn about the circumstances he is in? (Think about the
world around him and how it is described.)

3

121Cambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

 

122

 

TIP

Remember not to ‘micro-
analyse’. This means take care

not to spend too much time
commenting on one individual
word or phrase at the expense
of others, orto give it undue
meaning orweight.

'5!)

 

I how would you describe the overall style and language of the passage
(Is it largely abstract, full of inner reﬂection and thought? Active and
physical? Or what?)

I does the writer hint at any ideas or suggest the tone or mood of
the story to come? (think about the references to nature, the boy’s
appearance and so on)

2 Read the openings of two short commentaries by students. Which of the
two (if either) do you think best sums up the mood and what we learn
about the character?

A Small physical details such as the boy who lowered himself down the last
few feet of rock hint at an innocence— like a child playing in rock—pools.
However, we can detect inner conﬂict in the fact that although he had
taken off his school sweater, he hasn’t let go of it, implying a sense of him
wanting to do the right thing (not lose his sweater) despite the heat.

B There is a sense ofoptimism and hope in the piece, with the vibrant
colours ofnature, such as the bird which was a Vision of red and yellow.
The boy seems to be enjoying his adventure, clambering heavily about
the place, as ifhe is exploring

Sentence structure, variety and order

It is important to consider not only the vocabulary or particular phrases a writer
might use to convey physical details or description of location, but to look also at
the use of speciﬁc sentences and where key ideas are placed.

The boy with the fair hair lowered himself down the last few feet of rock and
began to pick his way towards the lagoon. Though he had taken off his school
sweater and trailed it now from one hand, his grey shirt stuck to him and his
hair was plastered to his forehead. All round him the long scar smashed into

the jungle was a bath of heat. He was clambering heavily among the creepers
when a bird, a vision of red and vellow, ﬂashed upwards with a witch-like cry;
and this cry was echoed by another.

These structural and grammatical decisions all help to create the picture of the
character.

ACTIVITY 3.13

Introduce your own character into an island setting. In this case, make the island
a cold, northerly one and the character older. Try to begin in a similar way:

I a compound sentence joined with and in which an unnamed character is seen
I a follow-up sentence which begins with Despite, Although, or Even though

I a longer sentence using the past continuous followed by a simple active verb.

Remember to stick to showing what the character does or encounters, rather
than telling the reader factual information about him or her.Unit 3: Imaginative writing

Character dialogue

Another key element in characterisation is dialogue. Although speech can be
used to advance the plot, it is equally important in conveying character traits and
moods. This can be done in a range of ways, for example:

what is said (the actual words spoken and the information or ideas they convey)
the style of speech (e.g. short abrupt statements, questions)
how it is said (e.g. tone of voice, manner)

inserted description between spoken words (e.g. the actions of a character, the
setting).

TIP

In drama texts, bracketed words often convey how the character speaks, and
there are sometimes stage directions to assist the actors in their movements or

gestures. However, the dialogue (the actual spoken words) is even more important
than in novels; it has to carry much of characters’ thoughts as there is no prose
description to tell us what is going on in their heads.

 

For example in this short extract, the narrator has got into Carlos’s car, which is
!}\ﬁlll Of newspaper.
“lust throw it in the back” he said.

As there was no room in the back, I simply burrowed my way into the heap.

‘ “Is there a safety belt?”

“You won’t need it here,” he said airily. “In Paraguay it is the law to put on
safety belts but it is only to make sure that the driver stays near the wheel.”
By John Gimlette.
A student, writing about the character portrait here, said:

Write a few more lines of
dialogue and description in
which Carlos approaches
and drives through some red
trafﬁc lights. Try to maintain
the same style of speech
from both characters.

 

The relationship between the two is established by the writer asking
questions to which Carlos gives definitive answers, expressed as
imperatives (‘Just throw it in the back’) or simple statements of fact

(‘You won’t need it here.’). Carlos’s ‘devil-may—care’ attitude is
exemplified by the adverb airily suggesting a confidence at odds with
the reality. The narrator’s actions, in which she burrowed into the heap
of newspapers tell us about Carlos’s car and, by implication, his possibly
messy life.

Lu
0)
Z
O
L'L
m
I.l.l
a
u.i
..i
a.
2
<
V)

What the student has done very elfectively here is to unpack the dialogue and the
detail around it to draw conclusions.

123Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Developing dialogue

Dialogue between characters can also be used to convey the shifting status or

mood of a piece; for example, the power relationships between people, or someone’s

developing hope or anxiety.
Read this longer passage and then answer the questions that follow it. As

you read, try to trace the development in the way we read or interpret the
grandmother’s character and her position in the household.

The grandmother didn’t want to go to Florida. She
wanted to visit some of her connections in east
Tennessee and she was seizing at every chance to
change Bailey’s mind. Bailey was the son she lived with,
her only boy. He was sitting on the edge of his chair
at the table, bent over the orange sports section of the
Journal. “Now look here, Bailey,” she said, “see here,
read this,” and she stood with one hand on her thin hip
and the other rattling the newspaper at his bald head.
“Here this fellow that calls himself The Misﬁt is aloose
from the Federal Pen and headed toward Florida and
you read here what it says he did to these people. Just
you read it. I wouldn’t take my children in any direction
with a criminal like that aloose in it. I couldn’t answer
to my conscience if I did.”

Bailey didn’t look up from his reading so she
wheeled around then and faced the children’s mother,
a young woman in slacks, whose face was as broad
and innocent as a cabbage and was tied around with a
green head—kerchief that had two'points on the top like
rabbit’s ears. She was sitting on the sofa, feeding the
baby his apricots out of a jar. “The children have been to

0 0 0 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

ACTIVITY 3.15

1 Work through the text and list key words and phrases
related to the characterisation of the grandmother
and the other characters.

    

Character

Grandmother

Son and daughter-in—law

   
  

Bailey didn’t look up

 

June Star

   

 
  

John Wesley

I Things said or responses to speech I Effect

Imperative statement: read this, You all
ought to take them somewhere else, etc.
[add more examples

]
rom his reading...

Florida before,” the old lady said. “You all ought to take
them somewhere else for a change so they would see
different parts of the world and be broad. They never
have been to east Tennessee.”

The children’s mother didn’t seem to hear her but
the eight—year-old boy, John Wesley, a stocky child with
glasses, said, “If you don’t want to go to Florida, why
dontcha stay at home?” He and the little girl, June Star,
were reading the funny papers on the ﬂoor.

“She wouldn’t stay at home to be queen for a day,”
June Star said without raising her yellow head.

“Yes and what would you do if this fellow, The
Misﬁt, caught you?” the grandmother asked.

“I’d smack his face,” John Wesley said.

“She wouldn’t stay at home for a million bucks,”
June Star said. “Afraid she’d miss something. She has to
go everywhere we go.”

“All right, Miss,” the grandmother said. “Just
remember that the next time you want me to curl your
hair.”

June Star said her hair was naturally curly.

FromA Good Man Is Hard To Find by Mary Flannery O’Connor.

2 Then, copy and complete the table. You have been

given some examples to start you off.

Shows her trying to assert her authority3 Once you have completed the table, write a short
commentary on the characterisation of the
grandmother. Refer back to the list of characterisation
techniques at the start of this section (on page 120)
focusing in particular on what characters say, how
they behave and how others behave towards them.

If you can, include a comment about the
ﬁnal sentence, which is an example of indirect
speech. What is the effect of this on our overall
understanding of the grandmother’s role in the family
and how she is viewed?

(Remember: indirect speech is often called ‘reported
speech’ as it represents what someone reports about
another person’s spoken words. It does not show the
words as they were spoken with speech marks around
them, but reports them indirectly. For example Layla
told me that she was going to the market rather than
‘I’m going to the market,’5aid Layla.)

4 Write 150—175 words of a text called The Visit in
which a relative from overseas is staying with a small
family in a small apartment. Convey the character of
the relative and the way others respond to him or her.
You could:

a use a typical situation such as breakfast or walking
with the children to school

I include at least three different speakers.

 

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

 

You might want to look back at

the Anita Desai teXt 0” Page 116 Characterisation is made up of a range of factors, some of which writers
to see how she describes the

situation before an unex ected
visit D It is generally more effective to reveal characters through showing what they do

or say rather than telling readers about them.

prioritise over others.

Dialogue, and the description around it, is often an effective way to convey
developing relationships and power structures.

In this section, you will:

 

read a range of texts which introduce or focus on particular locations or settings
identify key features and devices used by writers and their effects
apply some of those features in short written texts of your own.

contain descriptions of settings or locations. In some cases, these will be used to
advance plot or to reveal aspects of character. In others, setting is the focus — for
example in memoirs or accounts of journeys. The skills demonstrated in these
passages are often very similar, whether the text is imaginative ﬁction, or non—ﬁction.

r:

g ‘W a 7,*x_ﬁ__—_____Cambridge International AS Level English Language

     

Key techniques for describing settings

 

Whether a writer is mentioning a room, building, outdoor space or landscape in
passing in a phrase or sentence, or writing more extensively, many of the techniques
he or she deploys remain the same, and have a similar purpose — to convey a vivid
and memorable sense of the place and its atmosphere. How is this done?

by using detailed, speciﬁc adjectives and M describing geographical or
other physical features (a squat M made ofthin strips of larch; a snow~capped,
jagged 12%)

through references to the senses (The harsh cawing of crows at the top of the
birch trees outside, their bodies dark shaggy inkstains against the sky)

by using verbs, adverbs and prepositions that convey movement, stasis and
relationships as required by the text (the winding streets curve mysteriously
towards the old citadel)

through personiﬁcation of inanimate objects, buildings or natural phenomena
(The tower leans down to inspect us as we climb the steps, mocking our tired
paces)Unit 3: Imaginative writing

 

I through other forms of imagery, such as simile or metaphor, either in
individual words or phrases, or across whole texts (The city is a pond
seething with dangerfrom creatures hidden in the depths or openlypursuing

their prey)
I through references to weather, nature and other natural phenomena to reﬂect
W or create backdrop for events (She felt the sharp needles of rain prick her
Look back at the texts you skin and ran for shelter, watching as the grey dome of the sky unloaded its
read in Units 1 and 2 and force)
see how many of these I by using contrast and juxtaposition (The new town, all gleaming glass, noise and
techniques you can identify. money; the old town, a quiet sanctuary of museums and galleries)

I by using compound and complex sentences that develop initial ideas (The
mountain areas have olive groves, apricots, ﬁgs but the desert belowprovides only
oil. The gently sloping vineyards dominated the landfor miles, although the rain
battered on my windscreen, and, at the head ofthe valley, storm—clouds reared
like warriors before battle)

‘ “ FURTHER RE I through verbal patterning and repetitions creating effects that imitate what

is being described, or reﬂect the experience of the narrator (We left the cafe’ at
midnight, the lightsﬂickering in the street windows, the stars shimmering across
the dark sky, our voices echoing along the narrow alleys)

I by using the pen as a camera lens, allowing it to zoom in, zoom out, pan up,
down, across and cut from one detail or person to another (From above, the
Hackney marshes looked like a set ofdominoes, rectangles with dots on, but

ones that moved and swarmed. By onefootballpitch, aplastic bag ofhalf—eaten
oranges lay in the mud). 127

 

 

The senses

The importance of referring to the senses as a means of conveying ideas about a
place, a person or an experience cannot be overstated. There is no obligation to use
all the senses, as this would make your writing feel forced, but they can convey
powerful and vivid experiences, as shown in this extract:

 

I am in my bedroom, alone. I have a glass of water. I want to be certainly thirsty, like Jimmy and Ciru.
I want to try to gulp it down, like Jimmy does. This Water has more shape and presence than air, but it
word, thirst, thirsty. It is a word full of resolution. It is still colorless. Once you have the shape of water in
drives a person to quick action. Words, 1 think, must your mouth, you discover your body. Because water is
be concrete things. Surely they cannot be suggestions clear. It lets you taste your mouth, feel the pipe shape
of things, vague pictures: scattered, shifting of your throat and the growing ball of your stomach as
sensations? you drink.

Sometimes we like to steal Baba’s old golf balls I burp. And rub my stomach, which growls. I ﬁddle
and throw them into a ﬁre. First they curl, in a kind with the tap, and notice that when water runs faSt
of ecstasy, like a cat being stroked, then they arch, from a tap, it becomes white. Water, moving at speed,
start to bubble and bounce, then they shoot out of the rushing from a tap, has shape and form and direction. I
ﬁre like bullets, skinned and free. Below the skin are put my hand under the tap, and feel it solid.

tight wraps of rubber band, and we can now unroll
them and watch the balls getting smaller and smaller,
and the rubber bands unfold so long it does not seem
possible they came out of the small hard ball.

From One Day/ Will Write About This Place
by Binyavanga Wainaina.‘ ACTIVITY 3.11

1 On your own, work through the text and identify occasions when
particular senses are evoked. Copy and complete the table.

You could use this table as a way
in to passage—based questions
such as the one in the Practice
section at the end ofthis unit.

Sight
Sound

Touch
Taste
Smell

gulp

(

Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

and sight? and taste?

 

2 Now choose one of these simple actions and write 50—60 words in the
present tense to describe it. Try to use at least three of the senses to make

the experience come alive.

I making a cup of mint tea

I diving into a swimming pool or the sea

I picking up a broken bird’s egg from the ground.

Camera techniques

It can be useful to read and write imaginative texts as if you were holding a camera
— the things you choose to describe are what can be seen through the lens at various
times. Think about the way ﬁlm-makers are able to zoom in and out, or pan up
and down, track a person’s movements, or cut from one scene or action to another.
These are all things you are able to do as a writer.

Read this longer passage: ’

Very early morning. The sun was not yet risen, and
the whole of Crescent Bay was hidden under a white
sea—mist. The big bush-covered hills at the back were
smothered. You could not see where they ended

and the paddocks and bungalows began. The sandy
road was gone and the paddocks and bungalows the
other side ofit; there were no White dunes covered
with reddish grass beyond them; there was nothing
to mark which was beach and where was the sea. A
heavy dew had fallen. The grass was blue. Big drops
hung on the bushes and just did not fall; the silvery,
ﬂuffy toi—toi was limp on its long stalks, and all the
marigolds and the pinks in the bungalow gardens
were bowed to the earth with wetness. Drenched
were the cold fuchsias, round pearls of dew lay on
the ﬂat nasturtium leaves. It looked as though the
sea had beaten up softly in the darkness, as though
one immense wave had come rippling, rippling—how
far? Perhaps ifyou had waked up in the middle of the
night you might have seen a big ﬁsh ﬂicking in at the
window and gone again 

Ah-Aah! sounded the sleepy sea. And from the
bush there came the sound of little streams ﬂowing,
quickly, lightly, slipping between the smooth stones,
gushing into ferny basins and out again; and there
was the splashing ofbig drops on large leaves, and
something else—what was it?—a faint stirring and
shaking, the snapping of a twig and then such silence
that it seemed some one was listening.

Round the corner of Crescent Bay, between the
piled-up masses of broken rock, a ﬂock of sheep
came pattering. They were huddled together, a small,
tossing, woolly mass, and their thin, stick—like legs
trotted along quickly as if the cold and the quiet had
frightened them. Behind them an old sheep—dog, his
soaking paws covered with sand, ran along with his
nose to the ground, but carelessly, as if thinking of
something else. And then in the rocky gateway the
shepherd himself appeared. He was a lean, upright
old man, in a frieze coat that was covered with a web
of tiny drops, velvet trousers tied under the knee, and
a wide—awake with a folded blue handkerchief roundUnit 3: Imaginative writing

 

the brim. One hand was crammed into his belt, the mournful and tender. The old dog cut an ancient caper
other grasped a beautifully smooth yellow stick. And or two and then drew up Sharp, ashamed of his levity,
as he walked, taking his time, he kept up a very soft and walked a few digniﬁed paces by his master’s side.

light whistling, an airy, far-away ﬂuting that sounded

From ‘At the Bay’ by Katherine Mansfield.

ACTIVITY 3.18

1 Create a table like this on a large sheet of paper.

 

Medium shot Long shot Wide angIe/Iandscape
shot
Big drops hung on the Big ﬁsh ﬂicking in at the The grass was blue. The whole of Crescent Bay
bushes ... window... was hidden under a white
sea-mist.
Then, with a partner or in small groups, sketch l elements that are still and moving g
or write into the table the various objects, natural l the introduction of particular sound eﬂects i
features and people that are described in the text, as or other sensory experiences indicated in the .
Show“ in the examPles. description (not sight) i;
It does not matter too much ifyou cannot I the types of sentences and how these suggest
distinguish between long shots and wide—angle/ change or stasis,
landscape shots; the key is to distinguish between 3 Now write a full commentary on the passage in 129
the ways the reader 15 directed to View the scene at relation to its style and language, as you might be
Varlous P0111“. asked to do for a commentary—style task in an exam I  
2 Make notes of the way the description is structured situation

and ordered in other ways, for example:

Location as a reflection of character

Some writers use contrasting descriptive settings to establish ideas about characters
and their way of life in the reader’s mind. The extract below is taken from The Great
Gatsby. In it, the narrator, Nick Carraway, informs us about where he lives.

I lived at West Egg, the — well, the less fashionable of the two, though this is

a most superﬁcial tag to express the bizarre and not a little sinister contrast
between them. My house was at the very tip of the egg, only ﬁfty yards from
the Sound, and squeezed between two huge places that rented for twelve or
ﬁfteen thousand a season. The one on my right was a colossal affair by any
standard — it was a factual imitation of some Hotel de Ville in Normandy, with
a tower on one side, spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble
swimming pool and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. It was Gatsby’s
mansion. Or rather, as I didn’t know Mr. Gatsby it was a mansion inhabited by
a gentleman of that name. My own house was an eye-sore, but it was a small
eye—sore, and it had been overlooked, so I had a view of the water, a partial
View of my neighbor’s lawn, and the consoling proximity of millionaires — all
for eighty dollars a month.

From The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald.