Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

 

 

 

 

TIP

Make sure you do not confuse
dialect with accent. Although
they are often used together,
accent refers to the sound of
the language — the way it is
pronounced.

 

Further practice
For essay writing practice, attempt one or both of the following suggested titles.

1 With reference to speciﬁc examples explain how political correctness in the
treatment of speciﬁc groups has affected language.

2 With reference to speciﬁc examples from your broader knowledge of all areas
covering the language of political correctness, discuss your response to the
extract below.

‘Ladies’ and ‘gentlemen.’Please avoid such words. Heavens, don’t call her a lady.
Andforget about ‘gentleman,’ ‘history,’ ‘chairman,’ ‘manmade,’ Mrs,’ ‘normal
couple’ and ‘postman’ — along with 32 other terms. They have all been deemed
‘unacceptahle language’ by the exquisitely sensitivefolks at Stockport College in
northwestern England and banned from the campus.

http://www.iawandliberty.org/eng_spch_htm

Dialect, sociolect and idiolect

These three terms relate to the sub-divisions of a language according to the different
groups who speak it.

I Dialect is a particular form of language which is peculiar to a speciﬁc region.
I Sociolect is the dialect of a particular class or group.

I Idiolect is the speech habit of an individual; the words and phrases they
choose.

Dialect
Most importantly in English, however broad the dialect, it is comprehensible to

1 other English speakers; all dialects are generally understandable but the accent in

which they are spoken may limit some understanding for those who are unfamiliar
with the speech style. .

It is very easy to confuse the meaning of accent and dialect. Accent refers only
to the pronunciation of speech while the meaning of dialect broadens to include
speciﬁc words and phrases and the order in which they are spoken. Standard
English is a form of dialect which has no regional connection. It originated as
the recognised form of English and quickly became associated with status and
education, the prestige variety of English which is also discussed in the Global
English section.

Unless there is a physical boundary such as a range of mountains, the
boundaries between different dialects and accents can be blurred. Linguists use
language maps with lines known as isogloss to locate the general boundaries
between one type of accent or dialect and another. An example of accent differences
in the United States appears below.

Since dialects and accents are closely linked, the same questions of status
operate. The more geographically remote the dialect group, the less that community
will be inﬂuenced by incomers. Melvin Bragg, a British writer and broadcaster,
describes the local dialect of Cumbria, in the north—west of England, where he grew
up many years ago, as using thee and thou; a horse was a grey and a good horse was
a haary grey. The pronunciation was also distinctive: rrreet for right in an accent
which Bragg feels was broad and (could appear coarse’. Bragg comments directly on
the level of prestige given to this dialect.Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

Ascorr/e is a Scottish term for a
seagull.

 

ACTIVITY 5.28

The following are dialect words and phrases which may be spoken by people
from the following countries. You may be familiar with some of them! Try to
match each word or phrase to the correct country.

South Africa
Australia

 

 

 

 

 

India 211
the United States ,
New Zealand - ‘
Scotland

     
 

   

          
       
  

anti billy wee brumby biltong yabber
crib/bach scorrie half pie dorpie threads ‘
dandle goof around hokey pokey lekker Bollywood l

   
        

chota chai billfold boomer

    

       

British dialects

Many dialects exist throughout the English-speaking world but this section focuses
on British English dialect characteristics. 

The United Kingdom is well known for its many local dialects; someone from ; ‘
the city of Nottingham, in the English Midlands, will have a slightly different  ‘
dialect to someone from Derby, another city just twelve miles away. The main
dialects in England are spoken in the following regions:

the South-West 1.
Wales

the Midlands ‘
the South ‘ 1‘
the East a
the North T
Scotland.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

Carry out your own research to
find out more about the regional
variations in African American
Vernacular English within

the United States. Consider
differences in pronunciation and
grammatical construction.

Map of USA dialects.

 

Those of you who live in Britain will be aware that there are many different dialects
within each region. Whatever differences exist within a region, these are not as
great as the dialect differences between regions. For example, a Northern dialect is
signiﬁcantly different from a Welsh dialect.

Dialect in the USA

Look at the map of the dialect regions of the USA, where similar regional variation
exists to that in Britain, although the area covered by each dialect is more extensiVe
than in Britain.

Even with a relatively simpliﬁed map, you can see that there is a greater diversity
of accents along the eastern seaboard and within these accents there exist more
localised dialects; one of the most notable is the dialect spoken in New York City,

The same historical processes are at work in the USA as elsewhere in the English—
speaking world. Settlers from Britain were concerned to imitate speech that was
then considered to be of high prestige. ﬂiese accents subsequently changed. Settlers
arrived later in the west and were not as closely connected to England and generally
did not imitate English speech patterns to the same degree.

General American (GA) is a major accent in American English, also known as
Standard American English (SAE) and is often the preferred way of speaking in
ﬁlms, on TV. It is the accent most commonly used by politicians. Like the use of
Standard English in Britain, GA is not spoken by everyone in the United States, but
it is a widely taught form of English in other parts of the world. African American
Vernacular English (AAVE) within the USA contains many distinctive forms, but
there are also many regional variations within this dialect.Unit 5: Spoken language and social groups

Here are some examples of USA regional dialect words:

I faucet (northern), spigot (southern)

I frying pan (Northern and Southern, but not Midland), skillet (Midland, Gulf

States)

I clapboard (chiefly North—east) and weatherboard (Midland and Southern)
I gutter (North-east, Southern), eaves trough (inland Northern, Western),

rainspouting (chiefly Maryland and Pennsylvania)

I teeter—totter (widespread), seesaw (Southern and Midland), dandle (Rhode

island)

I pail (Northern, North midland), bucket(Midland and Southern).

And from New York City:

I punchball— a baseball-like game suitable for smaller areas, in which a fist

substitutes for the bat and the ball is a spa/deen
I scallion — spring onion

I stoop — a small porch or steps in front of a building, originally from Dutch

ACTIVITY 5.29

Try to work out from the context what the following British English dialect

phrases mean.

I [Mother to child aged two] Are you sad? Come and cwtch with mummy.

[Wales]

I He’s delayed, he won’t be here while tea time [Yorkshire/ Northern]
,I He do go there tomorrow; he has to clear out the weeds in the dyke.

[Norfolk, Eastern]

char [Liverpool]

You’ve won the lottery? Away on! Northern Ireland]

Eye dialect

In order to give verisimilitude to conversations in literature,
eye dialect in speech and dialogue.

I KEYTERMS

She’s just a bairn ~ she didn’t mean to break the teapot. [Scottish] '
I’m so thirsty I just fancy a nice cup of Rosie-Lee [London Cockney]/cup 0’

Eyup m’dack, how are you this morning? [Derbyshire/Northern]
Take that scowl oﬂ’ your face, you mardy child. [Midlands]

Don’t eat that raw lemon it’ll make your tabs laugh. [Midlands]
Light that ﬁre, I’m starved in this temperature. [Northern]

writers sometimes use

 

213Cambridge International A Level English Language

The following poem, by Jamaican poet Louise Bennett, is about Miss Mattie)S
strong desire to return to Africa and to her roots. It is written in eye dialect so
you may not understand all of it. Read the poem carefully and then answer the

questions.

Back to Africa

Back to Africa, Miss Mattie?
You no know Wha you dah seh?
You haf fe come from somewhe fus
Before you go back deh!

Me know say dat you great great great
Granma was African,
But Mattie, doan you great great great
Granpa was Englishman?

Den you great granmader fader
By you fader side was Jew?

An you granpa by you mader side
Was F renchie parlez-vous?

But de balance a you family,
You Whole generation,
Oonoo all barn dung a Bun Grung-
Oonoo all is Jamaican!

Den is weh you gWine, Miss Mattie?
Oh, you View de countenance,
An between you an de Africans
Is great resemblance!

Ascorden to dat, all dem blue—yeye
White American
Who-fa great granpa was Englishman
Mus go back a Englan!

What a debil of a bump—an—bore,
Rig—jig an palam—pam
Ef de Whole worl start fe go back
Whe dem great granpa come from!

Ef a hard time you dah run from
Tek you chance! But Mattie, do
Sure a Whe you come from so you got
SomeWhe fe come back to!

Go a foreign, seek you fortune,
But no tell nobody say
You dah go fe seek you homelan,
For a right deh so you deh!

Louise BennettUnit 5: Spoken language and social groups

 

ACTIVITY 5.30

1 "lhe poem ‘Back to Africa’ is about the search for identity as a Jamaican.
Discuss the importance of the eye dialect to the poem’s themes.

2 Select four dialect words or phrases from the poem and describe the ways
in which they differ from their Standard English equivalent.

3 What do you think is achieved by the poet by choosing to write in eye
dialect?

4 Find examples of texts from your own region which are written in eye dialect
and assess the extent to which they reﬂect the shades of the local dialect.

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     

TIP
Etymology is the study of
the origin of words and the
way in which their meanings
have changed throughout
history. There are online and
hard copy dictionaries of
etymology which can help you
see how a word has arrived at
its modern usage.

   

5 Many poems and novels use the eye dialect method. Select an extract from
a poem or novel of your choice and then from that, select ﬁve eye dialect
words or phrases. With the help of a dictionary of etymology, trace their
meaning and origins.

WM

Read the following extract and discuss the likely future of regional dialects when 
inﬂuenced by the social media. D0 regional dialects matter?

How regional dialects are spreading around the UK
thanks to Facebook and Twitter

215
Ageeold regional dialects from around the country are
undergoing a resurgence and spreading like wildﬁre Norfolk — ‘bootiful’ (beautiful/great), ‘bishey-barnee-bee’
thanks to the likes ofTwitter and Facebook. Language (ladybird), ‘mardle’ (talk), ‘putting on parts’ (misbehaving),
experts have found the increased speed at which people :Squit’ (rubbish) 

communicate on social networking sites means they are
more likely to lapse into colloquialisms. And the rapid rise
of social media and instant messaging in recent years has
seen such regional phrases spread swiftly from one end
of Britain to the other.

Now social media is having the same effectTV

Cornwall — ‘andsome’ (lovely/good - handsome without the
‘h’), ‘dreckly’ as in ‘directly’ (I’ll do it dreckly)

Liverpool — ‘boss’ (good), ‘scran’ (food), ‘busies’ (police)
Aberdeen — ‘ken’ (know), ‘bairns’ (babies)

Newcastle — ‘canny/mint’ (good), ‘ket’ (sweets), ‘raggies’ (chavs)

campaigns had in encouraging the spread of regional MamheSter‘ (mint, (V 300d), ‘mardy' (mOOdY) ll‘ l
phrases Midlands — ‘cob’ (bread roll), ‘pikelets’ (crumpets), ‘gitty’ 
’But social changes such as the speed of modern (alley)  V
communication mean they are spreading much faster Leeds — ‘in a boo’ (in a mood) i ‘
than they would have. Hull _ ‘tret’ (treat)
[Mitten FaCEbOOk arid texmg 3“ encourage Speecl Southampton — ‘nipper’ (affectionate term, for anyone aged 0
and immediacy ofunderstanding, meaning users to 100)_

type as they speak, using slang, dialect respellings and
colloquialisms.

’The result is we are all becoming exposed to
words we may not have otherwise encountered, while

Glasgow — ‘wean’ (child), *awayyego’ (no wayl), ‘geeze’ (give)
Wales — ‘lush’, ‘tidy’ (very nice, attractive)
London — ‘pukka’ , ‘sick’, ‘bangin’ (v good), ‘wack’ (rubbish),

absorbing them into everyday speech} ‘bUtters’ ('1ng

Dr Eric Schleef, lecturer in English Sociolinguistics Birmingham ‘ ‘taraablt’ (goodbye), (babbY’ (baby), ‘donnles’
at The University of Manchester, said the UK’s rich (handS)
landscape of regional accents and dialects is evidence of Bristol — ‘gert lush’ (very nice), ‘keener’ (someone who works
society’s continuity and change, local history and day~to— too hard), ‘mind’ (do you know what i mean?)
day lives, Nottingham — ‘gizza glegg/gizza gozz’ (may I see that?),

As a result, the English language continues to evolve :tWitche“: (alleyway)
as a colourful and expressive language.

 

«mm... W  amuwmwm an ,,_.,,,...m,.,..,., .m— .. .. w.“ ,—ww.w_vw«.—w mn-mm...m.«w..m ».

 

www.dailymail.co.uk