Unit 7: Child language acquisition

 

Compare your results with others to see if there seem to be any ages for
milestones in speech development.

2 Read the extract of caretaker speech. Explain how you think this way of
speaking is helping the baby’s speech development.

Participants and context: Kiri is talking to her baby girl, Charlotte, aged 9
months. She is putting Charlotte into her high chair.

KIRI into the chair we go  yes there we are (.) in the chair (.) who’s

a good girl  a very good girl
CHARLOTTE uumm (.) [waves arms]

KIRI Here’s some banana (.) banana for Charlotte (.) to eat all up (1)
good girl, yes some nice banana

[Charlotte grabs apiece cfhanana, squashes it in her hand and puts
it and her ﬁst into her mouth]

KIRI Is that nice Charlie  do you like that (.) good girl (.)

mummy’s good girl
CHARLOTTE [squeals and hangs the highchair tahle]

KIRI Ah good girl  here’s teddy (.) shall we give teddy some
‘ banana Charlie  oh good boy teddy eat up your banana 253

[Charlotte looks at Kiri pretending to feed the teddy with banana
and laughs and hangs the table again]

From one to two years -— the holophrastic stage

This is the stage of rapid vocabulary acquisition and basic syntax. A child’s ﬁrst
words are usually spoken at about twelve months and, on average, he/she will have
gained a vocabulary of about 200 words before their second birthday.

The term holophrastic refers to the ﬁrst grammar, where the meaning of a word
may have many possibilities: milk, for example, may mean I ’ve spilled the milk,
I want some milk, you have the milk or something similar. The familiarity of the
parent with the child combined with gestures — waving arms or crying for example
— facilitates understanding.

1 KEY TERMS

    

The following are key features of language acquisition between the ages of one
and two years.

Many of the lexical items learned are nouns referring to people and items in
the infant’s world (e.g. mummy, ball, juice, milk, doll, train, book) as well as family
names and pets. Vocabulary items relate to personal interactions (e.g. bye bye, thank
you, no, hello), simple verbs (e.g. kiss, sit, drink, walk) as well as general conditions
in their environment (e.g. hot, all gone, more). The young child is now much more
aware of the world around them so their speech at this stage (as with subsequent
ones) links with their wants and needs as well as expressing emotions and naming
people and things in their world. Naturally at this stage, children’s vocabulary is
limited — one word such as car may refer to anything with wheels.Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

ACTIVITY 7.2

Using the exchange between
Ben and his father and its
context as evidence, evaluate
Ben’s stage of language
acquisition.

It is perhaps at this stage more than any other that the language used by 370qu
children depends on how much they have been spoken to by the family around
them.

The child’s rate of learning is phenomenal and the two-word stage emerges
roughly halfway through this period as the child’s mastery of their language
broadens and their range of expression becomes more complex. They start to use
two words together, for example more milk, daddyjuice, mummy sock, tram g0.
These sentences are not usually inﬂected — there are no indications of tense or
person — but there is the emergence of a sequence and order of meaning.

The child is able to use a wider range of initial consonant sounds in the
words. Consonant sounds are produced at different times; the earliest consonants
pronounced in English are m, h and 19. Certain sounds (phonemes) arrive before
others. Sounds in the earliest vocabulary include plosive sounds (which require a
small explosion in production — put your ﬁngers close to your lips to say them and
you will feel a small puff of air) I) and p; and nasal sounds (produced in the nasal
area) m and n. The words spoken may be only partially formed or pronounced.
Many of the sounds produced by very young children seem to have no meaning;
they seem to babble for the pleasure of it. Their own language is limited but they
have a wider understanding of what is said to them.

The basic conversational pattern of discourse is established as the child begins
to chatter, often to himself as well as to others. By the age of two the child has a
working vocabulary and is poised for much greater conversational interaction with
those around him.

Read the following exchange which takes place outside a shop. Ben, 17 months
old, has been walking behind his father and has just fallen over:

BEN ovv ow ow ow
FATHER [still walking alyeaa’] ow ow ow ow
BEN 00w ow ow ow

FATHER OW ow OW 0W [tarmg goes back ana’pieéx up Ben]

Ben is clearly upset from falling over and is shouting to gain attention with natural
expressions of pain. He does not have sufﬁcient vocabulary to express his injuries
in any more speciﬁc way and as he is shouting loudly and still walking, he is
unlikely to be badly hurt. He is more concerned to alert his father to gain comfort
and reassurance.

His father is still walking ahead and repeating Ben’s sounds, which he may
see as showing sympathy; these sounds are immediately repeated by Ben. Now
that both child and adult are saying the same sounds, there is a distinct pattern of
turn-taking which has changed the distress resulting from the fall into a pattern of

mutually repeated vowel sounds, strong and monosyllabic. The language is part of
the care giving.