Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

   

ACTIVITY 2.23

1 Work with a partner. Copy and complete the table, deciding which words,
phrases or sentences are hard sell and which are soft sell.

  
 

TIP
Soft sell features tend to
focus on lifestyle, rather than
using more direct appeals

to the buyer such as cost,
practicality, etc.

 
   
    

Soft sell l Hard sell

Car A: rugged good looks Car A: new generation twin-power
turbo diesel engine

 
   

Car B: maximum comfort on the move Car B: And, with prices starting from
just £5,995 on-the—road, there really is
a Dacia Sandero for everybody...

 

2 Practise your writing skills for directed writing tasks by writing two
contrasting advertisements for the same everyday object (e.g. a household
item), one using a soft—sell technique, and the other a hard-sell technique.

Try painting pictures and suggesting a lifestyle for the ﬁrst; for the second,
focus on value, cost, practicality and use punchy sentences, and questions
where appropriate, to appeal to the reader.

0 i ‘ FURTHER RESEARCH

  

Further practice

1 For a more extended piece of writing for a speciﬁed audience, reread the

 

Look again at the Star Clippers

extract on pages 23_24 of Unit promotional text for the trip along Kenya’s coastline on pages 14—15 of Unit 1.

1. Would you say this uses a Look over the key features of the text again, and remind yourself of the techniques
Predominantly hard‘ or SOﬁ'Se” used to make the location and trip seem appealing.

approach — or a mixture ofthe

two? 2 Now, complete this writing task:

You workfor a travel company who oﬁer cruises to Antarctica. Write apromotional
text outlining the sort ofexperience a traveller would have ifthey came on one of
your cruises. Create a sense of wonder and magic. Write 600—900 words.

You should use the planning process outlined at the start of this Unit.

Campaign literature

Campaign literature on a range of issues (e.g. the protection of the environment
and wildlife) shares similarities with other forms of persuasive texts, such as
political speeches. Directly appealing to the reader, setting out risks and rewards
and so on, all add to the force of the text.

The text opposite is an example of an online campaign.Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

 

VIRUNGA: AFRICA’S MOST BEAUTIFUL AND DIVERSE OIL FIELD?

Keep oil exploration out of Africa’s oldest national park.

 

Your support really matters. People—power works. Together we will draw the line.

WHY VlRUNGA?

Heard ofVirunga? it’s Africa’s oldest national park, and a treasured World Heritage Site.

Rainforests, volcanoes, rare and beautiful wildlife — Virunga has it all. People who live
and work there know it’s a very special place.

ButVirunga is at risk of becoming Africa’s newest oil ﬁeld. When we heard UK oil
company Soco were exploring for oil inside Virunga, we had to draw the line. Some

places are just too precious to exploit. Find out more about Virunga and the oil threat.
VlRUNGA AND OIL

Virunga National Park is the size ofa small country, straddling the equator in
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

its got more than its share of wonderful wildlife — notjust huge numbers ofunique
birds, but African icons like lions, elephants, hippos, chimps and the remarkable okapi.
And a quarter ofthe world/s critically endangered mountain gorillas.

Soco’s exploring for oil isn’t the only threat to Virunga — civil unrest and wars have put
pressure on local people, wildlife and resources on—and—off for years. But we believe oil
exploration would bring a new and unacceptable level of risk forVirunga’s environment

and communities. 95

 

That’s why we need to draw the line. 7» l 

.wm. — .. n— tw.,.m-~mm<wAa-Wywx-mwwrwmwvWW.“ .7.” ,.,. v. i. pm“... a h, ~ W, m we  WWW. e MW". . «WWW. mm. WWW WWW... , s-” . “W”... W“ a.“ a.“ an...“ . . .7 . ,

ACTIVITY 2.24

1 Reread the text and identify where it demonstrates
the following features:

World Wildlife Fund.

Feature l Quotation
Uses forceful, using direct statements in the present tense Virunga is at risk . ..

Employs brief and abrupt phrases as forms of slogans
(perhaps using imperative verbs)

—
—
Direct appeal to reader as friend/fellow believer _
—
—
Suggests consequences of not acting —

—

 

Ends with a ‘call to action’

Share your ideas with another pair and make sure you The same group posts another online campaign about

are clear about the conventions and elements at work. an environmental issue in the country where you live.

You will be able to make use of them in the next task. BaSitlg your answer closely on the style and language of
2 For practice of directed writing questions Complete the original extract, write a section (120-150 words) of

the following task: the intrOduCtiOﬁ.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

0 0. FURTHER RESEARCH

TIP

Some writers try to persuade
their readers about issues by
adopting a persona. A similar
technique is sometimes used
in voiceovers on campaign
issues, for example where the
Earth ‘speaks’ to the reader.

I KEYTERMS .

 

 

Further practice

For practice of a more extended response, plan and write a response to this task;
A recycling charity in your area is very concerned about the amount ofwaste and
household rubbish. Write an online campaign text aimed atparents to persuade

them to think carefully about what they throw away. In your article, create a sense
ofoptimism and beliefin change.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Practise writing as many text types as you can.
Remember that different purposes can be present in the same text.

I Differentiate between questions which focus mainly on style/language and those

focusing on re—using the material.

I Always keep in mind the voice of the writer and, where stated, the purpose and
audience.

Key focus: discursive writing and writing
to argue

In this section, you will learn:

I about the key features of discursive writing and writing to argue
I about different ways of structuring discursive and argument texts
I how to plan and write directed and extended responses with these purposes.

This section focuses on these two purposes — discursive writing and writing to
argue — as they are often areas that provide the greatest challenges to students,
particularly in terms of structure and tone/mood. Many of the other purposes have
been adequately covered elsewhere, for example in the Text types section above, or
will be covered in Unit 3 (which addresses writing to describe).

Discursive writing is when you consider a particular issue, problem, or situation
and outline the arguments on both sides before coming to a reasoned conclusion.
The keys to effective discursive writing are:

to present both, or multiple, points of View

I to write in a detached, objective manner (avoiding ﬁrst person statements such
asIthink )

I to move towards a more personal response at the end of the piece, at which point
you give your ‘verdict’ on the issue.

Argumentative writing is very close in style to discursive writing and indeed
discursive writing usually sets out or explores key arguments around a speciﬁc
issue. However, argumentative writing draws more strongly on the writer’s sense
of voice from the very beginning. You are, to a large extent, trying to persuade or
convince the reader of your point of View from the outset rather than offering a
more restrained and briefer judgment at the end. Therefore, argumentative writing
tends to have a more personal, direct style.

For the purposes of this section, we are going to focus on the core skills for
discursive writing, many of which are transferable.TIP
Make sure you understand the

key words and requirements
ofthe task. This allows you to
create a framework for your
answer and indicate to the
readerthe areas you are going
to consider.

‘ KEYTERMS

 

 

TIP

Offering further (or subtly
different) evidence, which

nevertheless supports the
point you are making will
demonstrate your ability

to develop arguments, or
considerthem more deeply.

Wm».

 

  

 

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

Planning and structuring discursive writing

As you have already learned, it is important, to make a list of the key terms and
requirements in the task question. Do any words or phrases need deﬁning from the
start? What is your interpretation of such key words and phrases?

Remember:

I planning will involve having points for and against: two or three points for each
side of the case

I each of these points will form a paragraph of your answer in between your
introduction and conclusion

I you should decide on the order of your paragraphs. In order to keep reader
interest and an increasing sense of authority, it is best to begin with minor
points before moving on to the stronger ones.

Depending on your Viewpoint about the topic, there are options for how you might
plan your writing:
I if you are for the topic, your plan could be like this: an introduction, points

against, points for, a conclusion

I if you are against the topic, your plan could be like this: an introduction, points
for, points against, a conclusion.

Another approach would be to begin each paragraph with an argument, followed
by its counter—argument. Whichever approach you choose, each paragraph should
contain the following:

I a topic sentence or an initial question to outline the subject of that paragraph
I a consideration of arguments about that point in the paragraph.

I exempliﬁcation — examples to illustrate each argument (e.g. you might refer to
surveys or statistics, real or feasible ones)

I evidence of connectives linking sentences.
The use of connectives might include words and phrases which suggest:

I a consequence or result — because of this, the eﬁect of this, consequently

I additional and reinforcing points — furthermore, moreover, in addition, besides
this, similarly, in the same way.

There should also be connectives linking the paragraphs themselves. Such
connectives might include words and phrases which suggest:

I organisation and order — to begin with, ﬁrstly, at the same time, ultimately,
ﬁnally, in conclusion, overall, as a whole

I contrast — however, on the one hand on the other hand, yet, despite this,
conversely

ACTIVITY 2.25

Using one of the planning approaches mentioned above, set out your plan for
this task:

A magazine publishes an article called Can You Have Too Much of a Good
Thing? The article looks at the issue of whether the school-leaving age should
be lowered or raised in your country. In your writing, create a sense of
controlled and balanced viewpoints.

97Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Introductions in discursive writing
A good introduction can offer focus, structure and direction. You should avoid

 

Choose any one of the longer

texts from Unit 1 and see if you stating the obvious in a rather generalised way: In this essay I am going to write
can identify the topic sentence about or I am going to look at both sides ofthe argumentfor and against ... .
in specific paragraphs. Where However, from the beginning, a sense of balance and control needs to be evident for L

the text is more impressionistic,
you may find this quite difficult
to do and the topic sentence
may not be the first sentence of
the paragraph.

discursive writing. 3 2
Here is one possible response to the task which you planned in Activity 2.25; 3

Some people believe that education, the learning of skills and
knowledge, is one of the most important ingredients in young people’s
lives, vital for their personal development and the future ofthe country.
However, others believe that the benefits of long—term education are
over—stated and that it is far better for young people to experience the
world of work early in their lives for the personal development of the
individual and the good of the nation.

Lu
u:
2
O
o.
m
Lu
:1:
Lu
...l
n.
2
<
m

 

Here are some good points about this response:

I there is a brief deﬁnition of the idea of education (the learning of skills
a and knowledge) to communicate the writer’s interpretation of the key
idea

COMMENT

I there is a sense of balanced, opposed Views in the use of some people 
other people

I there is no evidence of a personal opinion at this point
I the contrasting arguments are structured around the word however

I the division into two opposed Viewpoints helps to establish the
management of any writing time — roughly, half the time to each side
of the argument.

{Wm

An alternative way of beginning the article might be to introduce the topic by
phrasing the arguments as questions, as in the following example:

Two famous sayings — ‘You are nevertoo old to learn’ and ‘a little
knowledge goes a long way’ — are often heard in this country. Yet is
education (the transfer of knowledge and skills to other people) that
important? Does it really matter if you do not achieve a certain number
of grades at a certain level by the time you leave school? Could the
money spent on education be invested more wisely?

in
w
2
O
a.
m
in
a:
Lu
.1
n.
2
<
V)t Kev TERMS

 

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

Here are some good points about this response:

I there is a direct start to the question using well-known phrases or
sayings

COMMENT

there is a deﬁnition of the topic
there is no evidence of a personal opinion at this point

the use of yet creates the contrasting points of View

both sides of the issue are raised as questions which sets out the main
section of the article that follows.

ACTIVITY 2.26

Write introductions for discursive writing on two or three of the following
topics:

whether people should be allowed to carry ﬁrearms

the internet does more harm than good

there is too much money in spOrt

marriage is an old-fashioned idea

animal rights are as important as human rights

the punishment should ﬁt the crime

science does more harm than good

terrorism can never be defeated.

Either use a general introduction which sets out the Views as series of
statements or introduce the topic/issue via questions that represent the
opposing viewpoints.

Using evidence in arguments

The development of argument and evidence (such as the use of particular examples)
is a technique that you should use in each paragraph of your discursive or
argumentative writing.

Certain words and phrases can be employed to assist this process. For instance,
inserted phrases such as they add/argue/believe or additionally in a supporting
sentence after an initial topic sentence can give further detail about a speciﬁc point.
For example:

Some people believe that education is the mostprecious gift ayoungperson
can receive. Itgives, they argue, afoundationforpersonal development and
participation in society '

"lhe use of relevant data, statistics and surveys (real or feasible) can create the
impression of expertise, and of the writer’s knowledge and authority. The example
above could be continued as follows:

...for example, a survey carried out by the EEC recentlyfound that most students
who received an education up to the age ofeighteenfelt more adjusted and ready
to experience the world at large than those who had left school or college at
sixteen.

99Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Sometimes, it can be effective in a key paragraph to state the counter—argument
with relevant evidence before addressing it. A further continuation of the example
response might read:

According to a recent survey in the US, many college graduatesfelt that their
TIP years ofstudy had not reallyproved oflong—term beneﬁtfor their emotional and
Note the use Of insertEd psychological well-being. Their stress levels, they argued, had been at an all-
phrases like they argued time high. However, supporters ofcollege educationfeel that the time invested in
to develOp the Idea’ and acquiring more in-depth skills and knowledge equips graduates with high—level

the inclusion of howeverto . . . . .
establish the contrasting expertise and understanding ofnotjust their own area ofstudy but the soc1ety they
live and interact With 

point ofview.

 

0 9’0 FURTHER RESEARCH

   

Here is a question asking for a piece of discursive writing, followed by an extract
from a sample response.

A newspaper aimed atparents andfamilies publishes an article called Should
Teachers Be Paid by Results? The article oﬁers different views about the topic.
Write the article. In your answer, create a sense of controlled and balanced

a arguments. : 1
ACTIVITY 2.27  ' 7

How could this part of the
response be improved?

i

Teachers are people who give us knowledge about education and the
world from their own experience and hard working student life. Teachers
should be paid for the degree and knowledge they have got. Well they
give the education to students in class and well students do nothing

and are always daydreaming or texting on their phones or talking in the
lectures of teacher’s and why should they be the reason for bad grades?
They are providing their education and experience. Well it’s all the fault
of students who aren’t interested or working hard at home or even
revising after leaving school. Teachers cannot feed you spoon in mouth

to get good grades. It’s thejob of students to earn and acquire good
grades.

in
U)
2
O
n.
U)
Lu
n:
m
_|
n.
E
<
m

 

‘Paragraph for, paragraph against’ structure

You are going to read four examples of responses to a longer ‘Writing for an

audience’ task, in sections, using the ‘paragraph for, paragraph against’ structure.
Here is the task:

An online magazine aimed at teenagers publishes afeature called Are Beauty

Contests a Thing of the Past? Write the article. In your writing, create a sense of
reasoned arguments.Write an introductory
paragraph (120—150 words)
for the following article
using the techniques
highlighted in the sample
response above:

A local newspaper
publishes an article
assessing the case for single
sex schools. The article

adopts a balanced and
controlled tone.

 

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

Introduction

Lu
m
2
O
D.
U)
LLI
0:
u
_|
n.
2
<
V)

COMMENT

 

‘Mirror, mirror on the wall: who is the fairest ofthem all?’: this is a well—
known line from a fairytale, a myth, from a world in which magic lives and
the ‘goodies’ always come out on top in the end. Yet it can also be seen

as a reflection ofthe world’s preoccupation with vanity. So many people
want to be beautiful, So many people want to be the fairest in the land.
It’s an obsession most people seem to possess these days: the need to be
admired, even worshipped, and accepted. Is there anything wrong with
this? Must the mirror give us a reflection? Does someone really need to be
set apart, as the most appealing? Does there need to be a Snow White?

Here are some good points about this introduction:

I the use of a well-known phrase or saying focuses the reader directly on
the subject

I the use of yet introduces the contrasting points of View

I both sides of the issue are raised using questions, which sets out the
main section of the article that follows

I there is no evidence of a personal opinion at this point
the use of repeated phrases and structures (80 many people want)

I the cyclical nature of the opening and close of the paragraph with the
ﬁnal question echoing the fairytale referred to at the beginning.

O i ! FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Paragraph introducing an argument using examples

Ll.l
V)
Z
O
D.
(I)
|.I..l
a:
Lu
.4
D.
E
<
V)

 

Beauty contests, it can be argued, have long—lasting effects on mostly
women and girls. Some people believe that these effects can be positive:
image, they believe, is important in the world around us nowadays. For
example,j0b interviews, public presentations and public appearances,
all require a certain degree of image-consciousness. Furthermore, a
recent survey by the NBC television channel in America showed that
many respondents felt that beauty contests teach girls to present
themselves effectively, to be polite and ladylike and, to a degree, to
take pride in their appearance by caring fortheir bodies and adopting a
healthy lifestyle. There was evidence girls acquired greater confidence
and addressed theirfears and concerns about mixing with other people
and learned to deal with peer pressure. Beauty contests, it revealed,
gave girls aspiration, hope and motivation, elements which are very
important at any stage in life.

 

101Cambridge International AS Level English Language

ACTIVITY 2.29

Write a paragraph of 120—
150 words introducing an
argument for the following
task, using the techniques
highlighted in the sample

response above.

A local newspaper
publishes an article
assessing the case for single
sex schools. The article
adopts a balanced and
controlled tone.

ACTIVITY 2.30

Write a paragraph of 120—
150 words introducing a
counter—argument for the
following task, using the
techniques highlighted in
the sample response above.

A local newspaper
publishes an article
assessing the case for single
sex schools. The article
adopts a balanced and
controlled tone.

 

Here are some good points about this paragraph:

I the use of a topic sentence (Beauty contests, it can be argued, have long—
lasting eﬂects on mostly women and girls) and a connective to link
sentences (Furthermore)

COMMENT

I the use of inserted phrases (it can be argued  they believe  to a
degree  it revealed) to develop and support arguments with further
detail

I the use of an example (a recent survey by the NBC television channel in
America)

I there is no evidence of a personal opinion at this point (Some people) —
a detached approach introducing one side of the argument

I the use of lists of three (aspiration, hope and motivation) to convey
depth and range.

Paragraph using counter-argument with examples
Read this example of a different sort of paragraph.

However, opponents of beauty contests feel that it is also a sad reality
that mothers, in particular, often become obsessed with them, insisting
that their often very young offspring participate in these shows and
processions. A recent film documentary, A Life in Showbiz, shows the
audience evidence of how young children are forced to wear heavy
make-up, have their hair done, and strut down the runway in high
heels. Indeed, this is a form of child abuse, some opponents argue, and
strict age limits should be applied to all such contests, and restrictions
enforced so that the participants can only appear and dress in certain
ways.

LLI
(D
Z
O
D.
U)
in
0:
Lu
.1
D.
2
<
V)

Here are some good points about this paragraph:

I the use of a topic sentence (mothers, in particular, often become
obsessed with them) and a connective to link sentences (Indeed)

COMMENT

the use of an inserted phrase (some opponents argue)
the use of an example (A recent ﬁlm documentary, A Life in Showbiz)

the use of lists of three (wear heavy make-up, have their hair done,
and strut down the runway in high heels) to convey depth and
range.

Conclusions in discursive writing

Conclusions in discursive writing should continue the measured approach

adopted beforehand, yet also indicate the Viewpoint of the reader. Read this
example:

 

‘- Hr $¥fogr§5~ﬁnu~ . w— .i AUnit 2: Writing non—fiction

 

One of the major issues associated with beauty contests is the type of
negative self-image it can foster in participants. it seems that beauty
should not bejudged in this way: competitions, after all, are based on
opinions not facts. ‘Beauty’, it is said, ‘lies in the eye of the beholder.’
Those who lose out in such competitions may lose self-esteem and
motivation, developing feelings of inferiority in relation to those around
them. It may well be that these contests would provide a more positive
and beneficial influence if they were controlled, and embraced all kinds
of beauty: physical and spiritual. We should be very, very careful: the
mirror on the wall may reflect the kinds of negative things we don’t really
want to see.

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

ACTIVITY 2.31

:2: Here are some good points about this conclusion:

Write the ConduSion Of 120— E I the personal View comes only at the end and does not rant or preach
150 words for the fOHOWing 0 but takes a careful approach (It seems)
taSk’ using the teChniqueS U l the use of a well-known saying or phrase (Beauty  lies in the eye of
highlighted in the Sample the beholder) is employed again, as in the introduction
response above: I examples of possible effects are offered (lose self—esteem and

A local newspaper motivation)

PubZiSheS “’1 Wilde l the use of we creates a sense of inclusion compared to the possibly

assessing the case for single more Opinionated use of] 103

sex SChOOZS' The article I the ﬁnal words also create a cyclical ending to the whole piece with the

ﬁnal idea echoing the opening.

adopts a balanced and
controlled tone.

‘Ar ument and counter-ar ument in each ara ra h’ structure
g g P g P
The essay below is a response to the following task.

A celebrity magazine aimed at a mainlyfemale readership publishes an article
called Is This the Real Deal? The article explores whether reality television
competition shows do more harm than good. Write the article. In your writing,
create a sense of balanced and reasoned arguments.

This response uses a structure in which arguments for and against are combined in
each paragraph. Read through it carefully, noting how it diﬁers from the previous
structure (‘paragraph for, paragraph against’). The words in brackets refer to
techniques that you have learned about and practised.

It is often heard that ‘fame and fortune await you’ [use of a well—known
saying] and in the current world it seems [word suggests detached
rather than personal opinion] that in the media landscape reality is
everything. The combination of ‘ordinary’ people and cameras seems
[word suggests detached rather than personal opinion] to be a formula
for success. One particular area this can be seen in is the talent show.

A long-established format of the entertainment world is now a thriving
industry worth enormous amounts of money [definition of the issue]. Yet

 

Lu
U)
2
0
CL
U)
LIJ
D!
Lu
.4
D.
2
<
in

 

0Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

 

[connective for contrast], are these seemingly innocent shows a positive 
addition to our lives, instilling ideas of a work ethic and the sense that f:
if you really work hard enough you can achieve any dream you have?

Or are they doing more harm than good by promoting the vision of a
lifestyle, a hope of fame and riches, of material luxury and wealth, to an
audience who will never achieve it? Are theyjust making money in their
advertising profits by cynically exploiting people’s feelings and desires?
[use of questions to introduce key areas of theessay]

Supporters ofthese shows believe that they bring the public closer
to the world of entertainment than ever [reference to one side of the
case in a detached way through a topic sentence]. Such shows, they
add [inserted phrase for development], allow the audience to engage
in a kind ofdemocratic process, where people power is the fairest
form ofjudgement. These programmes, a recent survey for a national
newspaper discovered [example], allow the audience to feel as thought
they belong, giving them some sense of purpose and satisfaction. At
the same time, it revealed [inserted phrase for development], voting
members ofthe public believe they get a glimpse ofthe world of
celebrity that they would never ordinarily see. When, for example,
contestants are mentored by starjudges in, say, theXFactor, a vision
of a lifestyle that is normally concealed behind the scenes is there for
all to watch: the rehearsals, the setting, the personalities. However
[connective], critics [the other side ofthe case in a detached way] of

n such shows highlight the consistent effort to represent any contestants

 

as ‘real’, as beingjust like any one ofthe watching public. They are
made to appeal, they believe [inserted phrase for development], to an
audience which is apparently fed up with aloof and distant celebrities.
This process, critics add [inserted phrase for development], is a cynical
exploitation ofthe audience’s emotions, implying that striving for fame
is worth all the effort and sacrifice, and, most of all, that it is achievable.
it creates the impression that fame is all that counts, they believe
[inserted phrase for development], that unless you acquire it, you are

a failure in some way. They point to examples of newspaper [example]
articles in which young schoolchildren, when interviewed, said their
ambition in life was to be famous and rich or to be a particular star;
more seemingly mundane careers and aspiration were not mentioned.
This kind of effect, it is believed [inserted phrase for development],
creates a ‘me me me’ society, where social bonds, friendship and family
all take a second seat. Years ago, children would want to be firemen,
nurses, astronauts. Now, for opponents of such programmes [inserted
phrase for development], it appears [word suggests detached rather
than personal opinion] that even the idea of work is anathema: why
work when you can be famous? Why work for anything?