Cambridge International A Level English Language

 

CHILD [at a station] train  train  big train

FATHER Yes  up we go into this train  careful now  it will he going 50071 U
see the guard is ﬂowing his whistle

Even when children are unable to pronounce a word correctly, they recognise the
correct pronunciation from adults. Interesting research from Berko and Brown
(1960) involved a child who called his plastic ﬁsh ﬁs. When the adult imitated the
child’s pronunciation and asked Is this your ﬁs?, the child replied N0 myﬁs. Aﬁer
this the adult said Is this your ﬁsh? and the child answered Yes myﬁs.

The child’s language production — what is said — goes hand-in—hand with rapid
progress of language reception — what is understood. They can now understand
two—clause commands such as pick up teddy and bring him here please and
contrasting concepts such as hot and cold. They are much more engaged in the
language and activities of the household, such as meeting a visitor.

Types of child language
Monologues

From the age of about two, children will often provide a running commentary

about what they are doing, as they are doing it. This may extend into their
imaginative play.

Mehdi, aged two and a halﬁ is playing with his trains:

Train here (.) [makes train noises] no train, yes more train (.) come [drives
toy train and carriages quickly along the tracks and they fall oﬁ] train —
train over (.) train back (.) oh dear all fall over (.) train here (.) Thomas train
(.) Gordon train (.) vroom [more train noise] go in your house trains

As the child becomes older, these short monologues become more like narratives
particularly when accompanying imaginative play:

Willow, nearlyfoar, is playing with her dolls:

Now time for bed (.) time to go to bed (.) come on babies time for bed (.)
let’s put you in the cot (.) do you want your milk now (.) that’s nice drink
it up (.) now to bed (.) you have to go to bed’ cos mummy said (.) mummy
said bed (.) night night (.) sleep tight (.) night night

Dialogues

We have seen how important the interaction is between the infant and members of
their family, particularly the caregiver. This develops from day one and is helped by
the attention of the adult or older sibling to the sounds that the baby makes.

@

\ H 77 "77” J