Reread the article on
motherhood on page 62 of
Unit 1. To what extent does the

writer include both arguments
forand counter arguments
within the same paragraphs?

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

ACTIVITY 2.32

Read, plan and complete the following task, using the counter-argument
structure you have just read about. You should write 600—900 words.

A magazine aimed at teenagers publishes an article called Skin Deep, which
assesses the arguments for and against cosmetic surgery. Write the article. In
your writing, create a clear sense of both viewpoints.

Stage 1: Begin by generating ‘for’ and ‘against’ ideas on the topic as you
learned at the start of the unit. Then organise your ideas into a series of
paragraphs.

Stage 2: With reference to the previous sample responses in this section, write
your own introduction (ﬁrst paragraph) for this task.

Stage 3: Write your own version of the next paragraph, bearing in mind the
following:

avoid giving your personal opinion at this point
begin with an argument created by a topic sentence
use connectives

follow the initial point with further development and exempliﬁcation
using inserted phrases (e.g. they believe, it revealed), as well as references
to examples such as surveys or statistics

I follow the initial argument with a counter—argument including
development and exempliﬁcation.

Stage 4: Write your remaining paragraphs with the related counter-
arguments, based on your plan.

Stage 5: Write a conclusion to the article, bearing in mind the example we saw
in the answer about beauty contests above.

Other kinds of argumentative writing

When responding to the longer ‘Writing for an audience’ task (600—900 words),
you may be asked to write two shorter pieces (e.g. letters) offering two contrasting
argumentative pieces about the same topic.

ACTIVITY 2.33

The two letters below are sample responses to a newspaper article about the
age requirements for elderly drivers. Rewrite the letters so that there is:

I an appropriate and effective layout

I varied use of argumentative strategies and techniques — such as the use of
exempliﬁcation (surveys, data, other sources) and connectives

I some use of questions to offer counter views
I brief direct statements to express a sense of voice

I appropriate use of language.

The question marks highlight points that you may need to think about when
writing your revised text.

105106

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

Dear Sir or Madameg,

i am writing in about thatO article in your paper last week about the age
when elderly people are stopped Ofrom driving. i do@ believe their ageg
should be lowered.

Many people of the requirement ageﬂ are usually not in great shape.
Statistics@ show nineteen out of twenty old Gpeople of that age suffer
from poor eyesight. 0 i don’t thinkO they can recognise people and
objects or situations any more like younger people do.

There is no doubt ethat it is true ethat as we get older our reflexes
get much more slow and not as good. These old people usuallygfind
themselves unable to react to situations anywhere near quickly
enough 9, putting their lives at risk as well as the people, especially
children, around them. We seene loads of occasions when children
are being chauffeured around by their grandparents. lt’sjust not safe.
ifsome other driver decides to go through the lights a car with children
driven by an old 0 grandparent could run into them: the grandparent
and the children will be really badly injured.

it is often said by peoplee that the older we get the more set in our
ways and the more difficult and less active we are. Most old 9 people,
especially old men 9, take little notice of their doctors and insist on
carrying on driving. They are endangering their healthﬁ by pushing the
limits, and they are putting others at risk. What would happen if they
collapsed behind the wheel? Without any doubt 9, they will cause a
serious accident. There is a lot of evidencee showing that old people are
likely to suffer from dementia, a stroke or a heart attack when driving.
There is a strong chanceé they will not survive and this also increases
the risk to other people. ifthey stayed at home, there are more likely to
get help and surviveg.

This kind ofthing could all be prevented 0 if the age at which old9
people could drive was lowered. i think@ we would all be far more safe.
I strongly believeg that old 9 people should think long and hard about
these things and that those who are in power should make these legal
changes as soon as possible.

Yours sincerelyO,

9

7. gamer“  Ac,

, aw.” MM”

 

s . ...:.«.WM.W~« ~w 1—...Wmi-rvr—a v —-Lu
W
Z
O
O.
U)
LL!
0:
Lu
.4
D.
2
<
U)

 

Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

Dear Editor,

lam writing this letter to respond 9 to the article from your paper about
the age requirement for elderly people to be allowed tog drive being
reduced. | genuinely and sincerely@ believe this would not be a good
and practical thing to do.

i realise that the fitness and alertness is@ an important matter. Most
elderly membersﬂ of society are still fit and healthy even when they
reach the required age for driving. They are not Gall weak and frail. Most
people of advanced years are fit and sound in mindg and do not suffer
from major ailments.

I realise that some old 0 people cannot always see that well and
sometimes their reflexes are slow 9. Some people eeven tell them to
stay offthe roads and not to drive at all. Rather than banning them from
driving why not make them pass regular health and reflex tests in real
driving situations? lfthey are fit they should be able to drive.

lfyou stop all old 0 people driving, this means taking away their
freedom, choice and independence. Old 9 people would need others
to drive them around or worsee or rely on their families and children
for mobilityﬁ for the rest of their lives  They wouldO no longer be
able to travel or visit particular place at times they chose themselves.
They woulde stay at home relying on relatives or the newspaper, or
the television for interaction of some kind. They would 0 be trapped.
it is a well—known factg that for oldg people to stay fit and mentally
stimulated they must be active and participating in a range of activities
and social situations. Without transport they will become like prisoners
and be lazyi).

in fact, old people are full of wisdom 0. They are very careful
driversgwho follow the law of the road and do not pose any risk to
pedestrians and other drivers.

i really believe the authorities should listen to my plea 0. Strong and
mentally active old people should be allowed to drive. Only those who
are not fit and healthy should be stopped 0.

Yours sincerely,

9

107Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

Other forms of contrasting argumentative pieces about the same topic could be in
TIP the form of two speeches (300—450 words each). You may be asked to create a clear

It is important that your sense of opposing attitudes and viewpoints in your writing.
speech shows an awareness

that you are addressing ACTIVITY 234
an audience and that your
language is appropriate for

Bearing in mind the techniques used in letter writing that you learned in
that audience.

Unit 1, read and complete the following task.

 

An article has appeared in your local newspaper which argues that the
voting age should be substantially lowered. Two readers write letters to the
newspaper, one agreeing with the article, the other disagreeing. Write the two

Look again at the section on letters (between 300—450 words each).

:2;::?;%::T:SH: gezl:;::es Cambridge International AS and A Level English Language 8693

and effects involved Paper 2 (October/November 2012), Q6.

 

Summary

0 o o R RCH . . .
FURTHE RESEA Remember these key pomts from this section:

I It is particularly important to plan discursive or argumentative writing.

I You can use a variety of structures to develop your argument.

Practice and self-evaluation

In this section, you will:

 

I read a variety of extended tasks
I select a task, plan and write it.

mm.» A

To practise the skills you have developed in this unit, and bearing in mind the
points you have learned, write responses to one or more of the following tasks.
(Each of these should be 600—900 words unless otherwise stated.)

1 A national newspaper aimed at a family audience publishes a feature called Why
Young People Need to Do Military Service. The article outlines the reasons the
country requires 18—year—olds to enlist in the armed forces. Write the article. In your
writing, create a sense of convincing and persuasive reasons.

. w» ..

2 A travel magazine invites you to contribute an article called Scenes You Must
See in order to encourage local people to take a greater interest and pride in their

environment and its history. Write the article. In your writing, create a sense of
enthusiasm and interest.

grim .

3 The local authority where you live has published plans for the creation of a theme
park in your area. Two residents write letters to the authority. Write the letters

(300—450 words each). In your writing, create a sense of opposing viewpoints and
attitudes.

4 Your government has invited two organisations to oﬁer ideas for the regeneration
ofa run—down site in the centre ofa major city. The organisations are invited to
present their ideas before the government’s planning committee. Write the text

for the presentations. In your writing, create a sense ofdiﬁerent viewpoints and
contrasting approaches to the project.

6%

\7Unit 2: Writing non-fiction

5 A newspaper aimed at a family readership publishes a feature called The Rise and
Rise of Social Media. The article explores the pros and cons of their use and the
eﬂects on those who have access to them. Write the article. In your writing, create a
sense of a balanced and even—handed approach to the topic.

Remember:

I Generate ideas ﬁrst, based on the key words in the task.

Make sure you are Clear who the writer is, what the task involves, who or what it
is for (if stated) and who or what the audience is (if known).

Think about the style/tone/mood required.
Plan your response in paragraphs, based on the ideas you generated at the start.
Write your response.

Check your work as you progress and at the end.

109110

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

Unit 3: Imaginative writing

ACTIVITY 3.1

Is this an imaginary account
or a real one?

Does this text
demonstrate any speciﬁc

descriptive or storytelling
skills? If so, what?

 

Look again at the extract from
Lostin London by J. M. Coetzee
on page 46 of Unit 1. It is written
in the third person and reads
like a story, but it is in fact a
memoir.

The principal focus of this section will be on extended imaginative writing.
However, as a way of developing imaginative writing skills, and for examination
practice, you will also look at passages of text, comment on them and respond to
tasks arising from them. You should also bear in mind that many of the skills you
have developed in non—ﬁction Units 1 and 2 are equally applicable to this unit.

Exploring imaginative writing tasks
In this section, you will consider:

I what ‘imaginative writing’ is

l the types of questions you might meet in examinations

I which kinds of questions you need to work most on.

What is ‘imaginative writing’?
Read this short text: it is from a traveller’s account of walking the Normandy
coastline in winter.

The sea had retreated miles out into the bay, revealing the mussel beds, like
charcoal sticks against the greying sky-line. Above me sand-martins swooped
furiously, ducked and dived amongst the dunes, and the tufts of marram grass
recalled to me childhood games, picking the spiky leaves and sending them
spiralling towards my younger sister. Ah, Alice  I Wish you were here now.
But you are gone ﬁve years, and nothing can bring you back.

From ‘Le Bout du Monde’ by Mike Gould.

Deciding what is ‘imaginative’ is difﬁcult. We could say that all writing arises
from the imagination because ideas are mediated between the ‘real world’ and the
printed page or screen. The travel writer above might be a real person and his trip
to Normandy an actual one. But what about the sister? Perhaps she was invented to
create a story we’d want to read? Or maybe she’s real too?

What we really mean when we talk about ‘imaginative writing’ is writing
that arises from invented or imagined situations or deals with invented
characters, contexts and story-lines. This does not mean that such writing cannot
be inspired by personal experience or real events; indeed we all draw on what
we see in our heads (often from experience) to ‘imagine’ new ideas or descriptions
into being.

The key point is that it doesn’t really matter whether the events in the opening
passage actually happened or not — the skills demonstrated here are broadly the
same whether the piece is ﬁction or non—ﬁction. In both cases, the imagination is
at work: either to bring back to life a real memory; or to create an invented one that
reads like real life.UMt3Hnmghaﬁvewﬁﬁng

Typesofquesﬁon

In an examination situation you may be asked to comment on the style and
language of a piece of imaginative ﬁction or a piece of descriptive writing which
shares many features with ﬁciton. You may also be asked to address a directed
writing task based on that piece of imaginative writing. The directed writing task
may ask you to:

I write a similar piece based on the style and language of the original extract but
placed in a different context

I continue writing the extract based on the style and language of the original
passage

I write a piece in a particular format, such as a letter or diary entry, based on the
material of the original extract.

You may also have to address questions which contain extended imaginative
writing tasks.

You might be asked to write two contrasting pieces based on a ‘before and after’
scenario. For example:

Write two contrasting descriptive pieces (300—450 words each) about a location
immediately before the arrival ofa storm and some days after it has passed. In your
writing, create a sense of setting and atmosphere.

Write two contrasting descriptive pieces (300—450 words each) about two diﬁerent
times ofthe day and their effect on aparticularplace. In describing each time, you
should create clear contrasts in mood and place.

Imaginative writing tasks may also require you to write a complete composition
about one particular topic, perhaps focusing on speciﬁc qualities such as sounds,
‘ colours and textures, or to explore a particular experience or process. For example:

Write a descriptive piece called Tie Shopping Centre. In your writing create a
detailed sense ofpeople and setting.

 

Write a descriptive piece called Tne Shower, in which the narrator describes in
detail her or his experience ofbeing caught infalling rain. In your writing, focus on
colours and sounds to help your reader imagine the scene.

Other types of question may have a more narrative element to them and ask you
to compose the opening to a novel, a story or short story for example. The focus

in this kind of title is on creating a sense of possibilities for future development at
the end of the piece: for example the gradual revelation of a character’s motivation;
the way in which the narrative may go as it ends on a cliffhanger; or the way the
mystery or suspense of the characters and setting may contribute to future events.
For example:

Write the opening chapter ofa novel entitled The Private Detective. In your writing,
create a sense ofmood andplace.

Write the opening to a story called The Cheat. In your writing, create a sense of
character and motivation.

Write the opening to a short story called When the Evening Comes. In your
writing, create a sense ofmood and place.

 

111