Cambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

 

   

TIP

When you come to write your
own descriptive pieces (for
example for the Unit 3 task on
page 114 when a character is
confined within one place),
consider how you could use
the technique of moving from
describing an internal to
external setting.

 
   
     
   
     
     
 

 

in front of the camp, no more than a mile and a half away. Rising from the sea
of moraine to my left, two spectacular and extravagant castles of sugar icing,
Yerupaja and Rasac, dominated the camp site. The majestic 21,000-foot Siula
Grande lay behind Sarapo and was not visible. It had been climbed for the ﬁrst
time in 1936 by two bold Germans via the North Ridge. There had been few
ascents since then, and the true prize, the daunting 4,500—foot West Face had
so far defeated all attempts.

I turned off the stove and gingerly slopped the water into three large mugs.
'lhe sun hadn’t cleared the ridge of mountains opposite and it was still chilly in
the shadows.

From Touching the Void by Joe Simpson.

focusing on three particular things: the world inside the tent; the world outside the
tent; his actions as he wakes and prepares tea. How does he do this?

ACTIVITY 1.13

1 Re-read the un-annotated section of the passage. Note down:

I any further examples of actions or observations which involve the
senses

I references to speciﬁc objects/items rather than general reﬂections

I use of imagery or ﬁgurative language to describe the writer’s actions or
the world around him

I places where, as a writer, he positions the reader to look at or turn their
attention to certain objects, natural places, etc., rather like a camera.

2 Now think about the style of the piece in terms of the tone or mood that
it creates. What impressions do you get of how the writer feels about his
experiences? Do these change at all as he wakes, moves around the tent
and goes outside?

3 Write two or three paragraphs in which you consider the language of 2
description and the style and mood created.

Describing an external location

Descriptive passages, such as the one above, can mix internal and external location
descriptions. This can be literal — for example, inside a building and outside
in the street, or more emotional — a writer’s private thoughts versus his or her
public expressions or behaviour. However, similar skills apply when it comes to
commenting on the effect of language.

It can be especially important to look for how groups of similar words or
usages (for examples adjectives, or noun phrases) convey a particular mood or
atmosphere. This mood or atmosphere can be broadly positive or negative, but you

will need to go beyond generality and try to be more speciﬁc. For example, for the
text above, you might write that:

The writer creates a very positive impression of the landscape with his reference to ,
the mountains which are ‘spectacular and magnificent castles,’sh0winghow much l l

he likes the scenery.m

Look at these words and
phrases taken from the
extract describing Kenya on
page 14.

Discuss with a partner
what overall effect or mood
you think is created by each
set of words and phrases.
Then copy and complete the

table.

Y TERMS

 

A pair of scarlet macaws breaks out of the treetops and
soars over a beach where the only tracks are those of
last night’s nesting turtles. You ride your horse over
the sands to a small stream where blue butterﬂies play
over brilliant pink ﬂowers. Sounds of jungle and surf
are strangely intermingled. This is where rain forest
and beach meet in Costa Rica’s Corcovado National

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

None of this is ‘Wrong’ but it does not really capture the style of the language. It
would be more effective to write:

The writerfocuses the reader’s attention on the mountain peaks which he describes
as ‘spectacular and magniﬁcent castles.’ This metaphor, containing these two

powerful adjectives, suggests there is somethingglorious, almost mvthic, about the
landscape.

This second version is more effective because it is able to refer to the speciﬁc words/
phrases used and their linguistic function, but more importantly it comments in a
more speciﬁc way on the particular effect of the chosen words.

Adjectives or adjectival/
noun phrases

Effect or mood the writer wishes to
create

protective, ideal, calm, inviting, balmy,
gentle

filled with sunshine

alive with coral

myriad fish

lush green coastal rainforests

 

Key technique: lists of three

Lists or patterns of three ideas or items in texts are often used for rhetorical
impact, in that they help build and emphasise an idea. For example, in the Kenya
text, the idea of a complete variety of wildlife is conveyed in the three references
to baboons, rare Colobus monkeys and even leopard, suggesting a sense of diversity
and an area teeming with life.

ACTIVITY 1.15

Read this sentence from the extract about Kenya on page 14. 4

A wide range of World Class resorts, centred around Diani Beach, allow
visitors to relax and enjoy this natural paradise with the best standards of
accommodation, service and cuisine.

Discuss with a partner:
I What list or pattern of three is referred to here?
I What is the message the writer intends to convey about the resort?

Now, read the following text about an external landscape and location. As you do
so, begin to think about the overall tone and mood that is created.

Park, the day—glo tropical version of “Where the
Wild Things Are.”1 But could any writer’s imagined
fantasyland be as wondrous as this?

The Paciﬁc Coast of Costa Rica is shaped like a giant
crab with two great claws. Within this wide embrace
lies a natural paradise so dazzling and diverse that it
deﬁes any adequate description. With 9,000 higher

 

23plant species, 850 bird species, hundreds of frogs and
reptiles and 10 percent of all mammals on earth, today it
is human visitors who ﬁnd welcome refuge.

From the stunning volcanic peaks ofNicaragua
down to the rustic scenery of Panama, Central
America’s breathtaking beauty allows you to just sit,
stand, lie or look in any direction and watch nature
perform around you. Howler monkeys roam freely
through the jungle canopy above while manta rays
weightlessly glide through the waters below.

join us in a rare adventure of nature unbounded.

A Star Clipper’s voyage is everything a conventional
cruise is not. Thousands of square feet of cream—
coloured sails billowing above you, warm teak decks
under your bare feet and with a good wind, no sound
apart from the splash of the waves against the hull.

They are the stars of the sea, as ﬂeet as the wind
and as graceful as swans.

These are true clipper ships reﬂecting their proud
heritage in every inch of their polished brass and
gleaming brightwork. Step aboard these unique
vessels and discover a new age of sail, where the
traditions of the past are happily married to the
comforts and amenities of the present day. They are
modern cruise ships in every way, created for luxury—
loving passengers who also love the traditions and
romance of the legendary era of sailing ships.

Life aboard is blissfully relaxed, much like traveling
on a private yacht. You’ll never feel conﬁned. Each
ship offers spacious accommodations and expansive
teak decks with ample space and not one, but two
swimming pools. In fact, you’ll ﬁnd that these ships
offer more outdoor space per passenger than most
conventional cruise ships.

When you rise, help yourself to a continental
breakfast with croissants, toasted English mufﬁns or
sweet Danish pastries. Or savor a full breakfast with
fresh tropical fruits and crisp bacon, grilled sausage,
smoked salmon and omelettes cooked to order in the
dining room. At lunch, a marvellous buffet of seafood,
salads and grilled favourites awaits your pleasure.

If the day includes a stop at one of the paradisiacal
islands we frequent, you might also be treated to a
festive outdoor barbecue on shore.

focus on:

dazzling)

1 Working on your own, look at the ﬁrst half of the passage up to loin us in
a rare adventure of nature unbounded. List the key words or phrases that
stand out in this part of the text. For the purposes of this task you could

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

When evening comes, our elegantly appointed
dining room featuring a splendid collection of
paintings of sailing ships becomes the setting for the
chef ’s ﬁnest culinary presentations, designed to please
the eye and the palate. All complemented by equally
ﬁne wines. You’ll ﬁnd our service to be friendly and
gracious, beﬁtting a sophisticated restaurant. Of
course, we would not presume to dictate your seating
preferences. On all three ships, you are free to dine
when and with whomever you wish — including
ofﬁcers, who join our guests in the dining room most
nights. The dress code? N 0 need for formal gowns and
black tie, casual elegance is the order of the day and
each night.

Friends gather round the Piano Bar and join in
singing a few favourites. And in the Tropical Bar,
the bartender shakes a pitcher full of some delicious
cooling concoction. Now, is there anything more
relaxing than this? Up on deck, a couple watch the sun
drop slowly into the sea as gulls circle one last time in
the sky.

Like a ﬁne resort, all the amenities are here:
double bed or twin beds that can be converted to
queen, marble bathroom, private safe, television with
in—cabin video, DVD player, direct—dial telephone,
hairdryer and comfortable furnishings. The décor is
tastefully traditional. You’ll ﬁnd the accoutrements
of a luxurious classic yacht, where everything is
ingeniously designed for comfort, ease and efﬁciency.
Burnished brass ﬁttings and mahogany brightwork
recall our nautical heritage. Soft natural fabrics reﬂect
the colors of the sun, sea and sky. Prints of famous
clipper ships and sailing yachts grace the walls.
Everything is immaculately maintained and your
steward knows exactly when to appear or disappear.

There’s nothing so easy and pleasurable as falling
asleep to the gentle rhythms of the ship and sea —
unless it’s awakening refreshed the next morning to a
newborn day.

Star Clippers, www.5tarclippers.com.

1 Where the Wild ThingsAre is a 1963 children’s picture book by
Maurice Sendak

I the positive adjectives used to describe landscape and nature (e.g.Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

I particular nouns or noun phrases related to the natural world (scarlet
macaws)

I verbs suggesting what can be done, or the behaviour of people and
natural elements (ride your horse).

2 Then, compare your list with a partner.

I Can you see any connections or groups of words/phrases that seem to
go together?

I Are there any key patterns of language such as lists of three?
I Does the writer use descriptions to create contrasts of any sort?
3 Once you have discussed and made notes on these issues, agree with your

partner two or three key observations about the style and language based
on the words, phrases and patterns you have highlighted.

Key technique: simile and metaphor

In the text, the writer does not just use speciﬁc nouns, verbs, etc. to convey the
experience of a holiday with Star Clippers; he or she also uses some evocative
imagery. For example:

The Paciﬁc Coast of Costa Rica is shaped like a giant crab With two great
claws. Within this Wide embrace lies a natural paradise so dazzling and

diverse that it deﬁes any adequate description. 25

 

This might be expressed in a commentary as follows:

The two ideas ofthe traveller being in the heart of the natural world,
and yet being welcomed by it are expressed in the two phrases which
describe the coast. in being shaped like a giant crab with two great
claws the writer conflates the landscape with the wildlife that inhabits
it; yet, by referring to the crab’s wide embrace it is suggested that the
landscape, and by association the people and wildlife, welcome the
visitor, thus making the description doubly attractive.

ACTIVITY 1.17

1 Identify in the commentary:

>.
D:
E
2
Lu
2
Z
O
U

 

I the point/s, quotations and comments
I the effect of the selected words.

2 Now, look at this sentence from the text:

From the stunning volcanic peaks of Nicaragua down to the rustic scenery of
Panama, Central America’s breathtaking beauty allows you to just sit, stand,
lie or look in any direction and watch nature perform around you.

6)Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

I On your own, look at the underlined section.

 

 

I Decide how the writer has used personiﬁcation here.

I When you have done so, write a sentence or two making a point,
quoting words or phrases and then commenting on the effect.
Remember, you need to go beyond saying whether it is a positive mood
or message.

 

Further practice

TIP Now work through the remainder of the Star Clippers extract on page 24 and follow

Remember not to use the plan you learned about in Section 1:
excessive linguistic
terminology or try to spot
techniques and features

of language (for example,
alliteration) just for their own
sake.

I Divide what remains into sections.
I Highlight key words and phrases and identify groups or patterns of words.

I Practise writing two paragraphs based on this section of the text,
commenting on: the style and language; how this links to the purpose or
perspective.

 

Remember to use phrases such as this suggests/seems/appears. ..

Key technique: understanding voice

You can use the same techniques of analysis and commentary regardless of the
mood, tone or voice of the text.

Read the passage below which describes the author’s feelings when he visits a
particular place in India, looking for a particular drink called a toddy. As you read,
consider the mood or tone created by the voice of the writer.

 

In the leafy parking lot of Karimpinkala, a ‘Toddy
Shop And A/c Family Restaurant,’ we found Maruti
Swift cars and gleaming SUVs, and cabanas that were
closer in size to a middling dorm room. We sat under
fans, on plastic chairs that skidded on the tiled ﬂoors,
and drummed our ﬁngers on a glass-topped table. We
were handed a menu, laminated in clear plastic. Apart

Kariumpumkala today is a slightly ghastly brick-
and—mortar structure, painted in shades of green and
pink. Its top two storeys are air—conditioned, every
ﬂoor is tiled, and the tabletops are made of granite.
Over the billing counter is a shelf full of trophies that
Kariumpumkala has won in something called the
Philips Food Fest. But most heartbreaking of all is a

perverse remembrance of times past—a sign that says
‘Smoking, alcohols strictly prohibited.’

Kariumpumkala’s present owner would talk of
none of this. He was obsessed, instead, with his legal
battle with Karimpinkala, the upstart establishment
down the road that, he claimed, had stolen and only
slightly modiﬁed his restaurant’s name. ‘That isn’t the
real one,’ he said repeatedly. But Karimpinkala still
serves toddy, and Kariumpumkala does not. lhat little
edge makes all the difference in the sweeps to win
Kerala’s hearts and minds.

from the ‘Sweet and cold coconut toddy,’ we could
have ordered Diet Coke, Fanta, the enigmatic ‘Soda B
& S,’ or ice cream. We could even have asked for that
most pan—Indian of dishes, GobiManchurz'an. As we
sat staring a little disbelievingly at that menu, another
SUV pulled up outside. A family dismounted—
parents, little children, and even a grandmother—and
stormed into one of the other cabanas.

From ‘Shaaaping in God’s Own Land’
by Samanth Subramanian.

Now read this initial response to the ﬁrst part of the passage.Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

The initial feeling which comes through the voice of the writer is one of
dislike and appalled horror. This disdain is apparent when the writer
describes the location as a slightly ghastly brick~and—mortar structure,
words which suggest not only his detachment and repulsion (ghastly)
but his inability to see the building in any particular shape or form ~ it is
simply a structure. The adjectives in shades ofgreen andpink add to this /
sense of a rather unattractive combination of features.

SAMPLE RESPONSE

 

ACTIVITY 1 .1 8

1 Discuss with a partner: 2 Now, look at the rest of the text. Can you ﬁnd
I what ‘voice’ does this commentary suggests evidence to support the points made in the table?
emerges from the text?

I What evidence does the student provide to
support this View?

I Do you agree with the commentary?

I Evidence/quotation

There are some unexpected ~ However, it is implied that 
compliments in the way the building is
described.

The writer, however, qualifies what 27

he says, and this undermines the
compliments.

 

 
  

x KEY TERMS

      

TIP

In texts, look out forthe use ofqualification — a way of undermining what is
apparently being said. This can point to the writer’s ambivalent or less positive
perspective or viewpoint.

 
     
 

Key technique: connotations

You have already been using your knowledge of word/phrase connotations, even if I
you were not aware of it! But what are connotations? 3

Many words, phrases or sentences do not simply describe literal or surface 
meanings. They can also suggest, or bring to mind, other words, phrases, ideas,
feelings and so on.

For example, on a simple level, green denotes a colour we can all recognise.
However, it also suggests all sorts of other ideas: some of these might be concrete
images such as lawns, grass, trees and so on; others might be abstract notions such
as freshness, innocence (and possibly naivety), organic concerns, or ‘Nature’ more
generally. It may also bring to mind idioms, such as green with envy. All of these 
ideas might be said to be ‘carried’ by the word green without being stated directly. 

TIP

Making a list of key individual
words, groups of words,

phrases and ideas which
contrast or oppose each
other, can help you, as the Connotations are often linked to positive or negative Views. For example,

reader, to pull out opposing imagine these choices when writing a letter to an employer: r
strands of style and language. 1

 

0 a
lDiscuss with a partner:

I what each of the

underlined adjectives
suggests/connotes

how each one is subtly

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

I believe I am ideal for this challenging post as I am very assertive/conﬁdent/Qushy/

dominant/selt—Qossessed. My academic record also shows that I am brainy/geeky!
intelligent/clever/cunning, 50 will be able to deal with the complex demands of the role.

In longer descriptions, we can see the greater range of language choices available
and also the wider connotations these imply. For example, read these two
descriptions:

I the thin urchin fading without trace behind twisted posts in the suﬁocating traﬁ‘ic

(or perhaps completely)
different from the
alternatives (e.g. what is
the difference between
someone who is cunning
and someone who is
clever?)

which are broadly
positive and which are
negative. (Take care:
this may depend on the
context — what may not
be suitable or relevant to
a job application might
be entirely suitable in a
less formal context.)

Above the plants that creep across the ground are

the bushes, which grow wherever an indentation in
the earth, scarcely visible to the eye, allows for the
concentration of more moisture from the dew and
the reluctant rain. There is the ever—present round
mound of prickly weed, which begins its life a strong
acid green with hints of yellow, and then is burnt by
the sun or the frost to a pale whitish yellow. As it ages,
its root system weakens so that on windy days the
wind will pick it out of the earth and roll it slowly and
majestically about like whirling suns in a Van Gogh
painting. Where the soil contains limestone, stronger

I the lithe youth moving eﬁ‘ortlesslyfrom lamp to lamp in the busy avenue.

Both describe a broadly similar event, but the ﬁrst has connotations of hunger,
poverty and invisibility in a choked-up town; the second suggests health,
athleticism and an energetic environment.

Positive and negative aspects of a place can occur within the same text of course.
For example, read this extract which is taken from an autobiography and explores
the writer’s memories of living in a certain part of Australia.

 

bushes grow, sometimes two to three feet high, with
the delicate narrow-leaved foliage of arid climates,
bluish green and dusty grey in color, perfectly adapted
to resist the drying sun. Where the soil is less porous
and water will lie for a while after rain, comes the
annual saltbush, a miraculous silvery—grey plant which
stores its own water in small balloonlike round leaves
and thrives long after the rains have vanished. Its
sterner perennial cousin, which resembles sagebrush,
rises on woody branches and rides out the strongest
wind.

From The Road from Coorain by Jill Kerr Conway.Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

 

ACTIVITY 1.20 . l

1 Read through the text again and pick out any words or phrases that
suggest contrasting moods, such as a weakness/strength in nature.

2 Can you identify what sorts or words you have selected? (e.g are some
verbs? Nouns? If so, which?)

3 What part, if any, does imagery play in the world described? ('lhink about
similes or metaphors.) What connotations are suggested by these images?

Now read this short commentary on the text:

A sense of contrast but also of ideas which echo each other come
together to create two opposing moods in the landscape. There are
negative connotations in the sense ofthe struggle for life (plants that ii
creep ... scarcely visible reluctant rain ... burnt by the sun ... root
systems weakens wintry days). The verbs here such as creep and 
weakens suggest a sense of tentative, fragile life. 
The whole scene seems to be a world of elements where the struggle
for life is marked out by the colours themselves. The deathly lifelessness
of this world is suggested by the acid green, the pale whitish yellow and
the dustygrey.
Yet, there are also groups of words which convey life and energy 29
emerging (delicate narrowed leaved foliage ... a miraculous silvery—grey
plant... thrives long after sterner perennial cousin  rises and rides).
The writer even uses a simile (where two things are compared using
like or as) which gives an unexpected quality to the passage — it conveys :3
how what should be a potential source of life (the sun) seems to be a
mixture of beautiful energy and destruction (the wind willpick it out of
the earth and roll it slowly and majestically about like whirling suns) so
that both opposing moods arejoined in the image.

COMMENTARY

 

 

ACTIVITY 1.21

1 Which contrasts has the writer of the commentary picked out?

How has the writer of the commentary used connotation to explore 
particular words or phrases? (Look for words such as suggest, seems,
convey, implications.) 5

Describing an internal location

As can be seen in the commentaries on the two texts above, descriptions of people 
and places are not always as straightforward as they seem. The View of the writer
may both admire and condemn, be shocked and yet spellbound.

Read this extract in which George Orwell describes a Visit to an underground ‘;
mine.The time to go there is when the machines are roaring
and the air is black with coal dust, and when you can
actually see what the miners have to do. At those times
the place is like hell, or at any rate like my own mental
picture of hell. Most of the things one imagines in hell
are if there — heat, noise, confusion, darkness, foul air,
and, above all, unbearably cramped space. Everything
except the ﬁre, for there is no ﬁre down there except
the feeble beams of Davy lamps and electric torches
which scarcely penetrate the clouds of coal dust.
When you have ﬁnally got there... you crawl
through the last line of pit props and see opposite you a
shiny black wall three or four feet high. This is the coal
face. Overhead is the smooth ceiling made by the rock
from which the coal has been cut; underneath is the
rock again, so that the gallery you are in is only as high
as the ledge of coal itself, probably not much more
than a yard. The ﬁrst impression of all, overmastering
everything else for a while, is the frightful, deafening
din from the conveyor belt which carries the coal
away. You cannot see very far, because the fog of coal
dust throws back the beam of your lamp, but you can
see on either side of you the line of half—naked kneeling
men, one to every four or ﬁve yards, driving their
shovels under the fallen coal and ﬂinging it swiftly
over their left shoulders. They are feeding it on to the
conveyor belt, a moving rubber belt a couple of feet
wide which runs a yard or two behind them. Down
this belt a glittering river ofcoal races constantly. In a

ACTIVITY 1.22

Cambridge lnternationalAS Level English Language

 

big mine it is carrying away several tons of coal every
minute. It bears it off to some place in the main roads
where it is shot into tubs holding half a tun, and thence
dragged to the cages and hoisted to the outer air...

It is impossible to watch the ‘ﬁllers’ at work
without feeling a pang of envy for their toughness. It
is a dreadful job that they do, an almost superhuman
job by the standard of an ordinary person. For they are
not only shifting monstrous quantities of coal, they are
also doing, it in a position that doubles or trebles the
work. They have got to remain kneeling all the while
— they could hardly rise from their knees without
hitting the ceiling — and you can easily see by trying
it what a tremendous effort this means. Shovelling
is comparatively easy when you are standing up,
because you can use your knee and thigh to drive the
shovel along; kneeling down, the whole of the strain
is thrown upon your arm and belly muscles. And the
other conditions do not exactly make things easier.
There is the heat — it varies, but in some mines it is
suffocating — and the coal dust that stuffs up your
throat and nostrils and collects along your eyelids, and
the unending rattle of the conveyor belt, which in that
conﬁned space is rather like the rattle of a machine
gun. But the ﬁllers look and work as though they were
made of iron. They really do look like iron hammered
iron statues — under the smooth coat of coal dust
which clings to them from head to foot.

From Down the Mine by George Orwell.

Discuss with a partner what evidence you can ﬁnd that the writer is both
appalled and impressed by what he encounters?

Key technique: using the senses

We have already seen how writers, particularly of highly descriptive passages, use
the senses to convey ideas and feelings. This is especially true in the text you have
just read. For example, the very opening sentence:

_/

The time to go there is when the machines are roaring and the air is black with
coal dust, and when you can actually see what the miners have to do.

Now read the following commentary which deals with these and other more
unpleasant aspects of the Visit.TIP
Look for references to

the senses in descriptive
passages to find clues about

the positive or negative
impressions ofa place.

COMMENTARY

 

    

Using the senses can be

. particularly effective when one
specific experience or detail
is explored. For example, look
at the different ways snow is
described in Chenjerai Hove’s,A
Letter To My Mother on page 34.

opposite.

Unit 1: Reading non-fiction

The writer conveys a feeling of oppression through selection of words
such as roaring and noise, for example, and evokes a world where the
senses — physical aspects such as sight, smell, taste, touch, hearing of
the visitor — seem to be physically attacked. In addition, the sense of an
alien landscape is conveyed by the simile the place is like hell, suggesting
an almost demonic and corrupting location. The sense of complete
oppression is also clarified by the writer’s selection of a detailed list
(heat, noise, confusion, darkness, foul air), as if one thing after another
hits the visitor to the mine, as if there is no escape.

ACTIVITY 1.23

1 Read the text again and note down any positive impressions Orwell
gets. You should already have some ideas from the discussion activity

2 Note down whether these are contrasted with other, unpleasant aspects,
for example, the strange sense of beauty in the mine.

Key technique: verbs, adjectives and similes

When commenting on a passage, you should look for content ideas such as ‘reference
to the senses’ but also for particular words or linguistic functions, such as action
verbs; adjectives related to shape or size; and imagery such as the use of simile.

ACTIVITY 1.24

Read the ﬁrst four paragraphs of this long extract, listing key words and
phrases. Identify examples of similes, adjectives and verbs, and what their

effects might be.

A quite different world opens before me when I only
just push at the heavy door that separates the shop
from our apartment.

It is a door entirely covered with tin. Instead of a
latch it has a big key that is always in the lock. In the
dark rear shop, into which I tumble ﬁrst, I grope along
the walls as though I were blind. Thick yellow sheets of
paper rustle underfoot.

Wrapped-up wall clocks rest on the ﬂoor here.
Until they are hung on walls, they do not move; they
lie quiet and soundless, as if buried alive. But the stuffy
air of the dark chamber seems swollen with the voices
that seep in from the shop. The voices crowd against
the high wooden wall and recoil from it again. I stand
behind it as in a prison, and listen to what is being said.
I want to make out whose voice is talking. And if I
Catch mother’s voice, I am content.

But wait! Is her voice quiet, calm, or, God forbid,
angry? Mother’s voice will give me warning, tell me
whether to go into the shop or not.

Her high tones encourage me. I touch the curtain
of the last door, which leads to the shop. I become
dizzy at once because of the mirrors and glass. All the
clocks are being wound in my ears. The shop is full of
glitter on every side. The ﬂashing of silver and gold
blinds me like ﬁre; it is reﬂected in the mirrors, roams
over the glass drawers. It dazzles my eyes.

Two large gas chandeliers burn high up under the
ceiling, humming loudly; the sound becomes a moan
of pain. Fire spatters from the close—netted caps on the
burners that barely hold back the sparks.

There are two high walls entirely lined from top to
bottom with glass cupboards. The cupboards reach up
to the ceiling and are so solidly built that they seem to

0

31have grown into it. Their glass doors slide easily back
and forth. Through the glass one can clearly see all the
objects on display, almost touch them with one’s hand.

On the shelves are goblets, wineglasses, sugar bowls,
saucers, braided baskets, milk and water pitchers, fruit
bowls. Everything shines and glitters with a newly
polished look. Whenever I move, all the objects run
after me in reﬂection. The ﬁre of the lamps and the
light of the silver cross each other. Now the silver
drowns in a ﬂash of the lamplight, now it re-emerges
with an even sharper glitter.

On the opposite wall there is another glass
cupboard. Behind its panes are objects not of silver but
of white metal, and their gleam is much more modest,
and quieter.

In the center of the shop, on three sides, there
rise, as if from the ﬂoor itself, three inner walls — long
counters with drawers. They divide the shop into two
sections. All laid out with glass, full of gold objects,
they glitter like magical arks. Little stones of all colors,
framed in gold rings, earrings, brooches, bracelets,
ﬂicker there like lighted matches.

In this air full ofﬁre it is quite impossible to see
that the ﬂoor is dark. At the front, at the very feet of

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

the customers, entire silver services shine through the
glass. And so even the customers’ black shoes glitter
and catch reﬂections along with the silver.

The third wall is dim even by day. Overgrown
with long hanging clocks, it looks like a forest of dark
trees. There are wall clocks of various sizes. Some
have big, squat cases with thick hanging chains
supporting heavy copper weights. Other wall clocks
have narrower, slimmer bodies. Their chains are
lighter, more movable, with smaller weights attached.
In the bellies of all of them pointed pendulums
dangle like swords, swinging restlessly back and
forth.

Among the large wall clocks smaller ones are
hiding, and even tiny ones; one can see only the
white dials, their round moon faces. They have no
wooden bellies, and their chain legs move in the
open, before everyone’s eyes, up and down. The
whole wall of clocks sighs and breathes heavily. From
each box come smothered groans, as though at every
moment someone were being killed on the dark wall.

From Burning Lights by Bella Chagall.

Now read the following commentary on the ﬁrst four paragraphs of the passage.

progress.

>.
n:
E
2
DJ
E
2
O
U

The writer creates a sense of the oppressive nature of the interior (a
similar quality to that we saw in the passage about the mine) in the way
that the narrator seems to be in a location where there is a sense ofslow

The use of adjectives in heavy door, dark rear shop and Thickyel/ow

sheets ofpaper create a feeling of weight and difficulty. Similar phrases, .'
especially in the use of verbs, add to this sense of limited progresszjust
push at, tumble and grape convey a mood of stumbling progress.

The atmosphere seems deathly and lifeless; the simile describing
how the clocks lie quiet and soundless, as ifburied alive develops this
atmosphere and the mood of limited opportunities for escape. Further
similes — such as as though I were blind and/stand behind it as in a prison
~ highlight the narrator’s suspicion that there is no certainty in or escape
from this world.

References to noise add to this sense of a sinister and threatening
atmosphere. We are told of voices thatseep in, implying a gradual and
persistent challenge but that gradually they start to crowd the shop, as if
approaching closer and closer.

 

I Which of these elements were ones you selected or identiﬁed?

I How well does the student link his or her ideas in this commentary? (Look at
the connective words or phrases used.)