112

Cambridge International AS Level English Language

TIP

Rememberthat ifyou are
given the ‘end’ words for a
composition task, you must

make sure that these are the
very last words used in your
answer. Plan thoroughly so
that you know from the start
where your piece is leading.

 

 

Or you may be asked to write a complete story. For example, you will choose a title '_
like one of these:

Write a short story called The Unexpected Guest. In your writing, create a mood of
tension and suspense.

Write a short story called Arriving for the First Time. In your writing, convey the
thoughts and feelings of a narrator moving to a new and previously unseen location.

Other questions may ask you begin to begin your composition with words given
in the task. These types of question usually stress that you do not have to bring the
writing to a close or offer a ﬁnal ending. For example:

‘The open road stretched ahead of them. There was only one way they could go.’
Continue the opening to this story (although you do not have to write a complete
story). In your writing, create a sense of a mysterious future.

Some titles may require you to end your composition with words given in the task,

Write a short story which ends with these words: ‘. .. gradually the light grew
clearer: it was real.’

ACTIVITY 3.2

Re-read the titles for the extended imaginative writing tasks on page 112 and
above and make brief notes in response to these questions:

I Which would you feel most conﬁdent about writing? Why?
I Which would be the most challenging? Why?

Keep a note of your initial thoughts and eValuate how far you have been able
to address your concerns about certain tasks by the end of this unit.

Summary
Remember these key points from this section:

I Many of the skills you developed in reading and writing non-ﬁction will also be
relevant to this unit — ‘imaginative’ is a broad and inclusive term.

I Imaginative writing tasks arise either from a set passage or from a more open
style of question.
I You may be required to write part of a text or a whole text so having an

understanding of structure and sequence is as important in ﬁctional work as for
non—ﬁction texts.

Key reading and writing skills

It is important that you develop a repertoire of key writing skills used by writers
of imaginative texts. These will be useful not only in your directed writing work,
but also in freer, more extended writing. These include things such as narrative
voice and how you position the reader, through to building and developing
characterisation, as well as thematic ideas such as how you can make use of
recurring motifs and patterns in your descriptive or narrative writing.Unit 3: Imaginative writing

 

Narrative voice

In this section, you will learn:

m I about ﬁrst, second and third person narration
« .th t I how to use them in your own work.
Discuss w1 a par ner:

When we talk about ﬁrst and third person narration, at a simple level it can just

difference in . . . . .
I IS there any mean the use of I or he/she to indicate the perspective from which a story IS told, or

how we ‘read’ the story

because of the use of the
ﬁrst or third person here? I waited at the platform wondering she would come. The clock ticked slowly past

the hour. Sol came hackfrom the cafe and we sat on a bench, staring morosely at the
arrivals board.

a description given. For example:

I Does one version
foreground one person’s
perspective more than He waited at the platform wondering she would come. The clock ticked slowly past
the other? the hour. Sol came hackfrom the cafe and they sat on a bench, staring morosely at

the arrivals board.

In this extract from Alice Walker’s story The Flowers, a girl, Myop, is exploring near
her house...

1 She had explored the woods behind the house many times. Often, in late V
autumn, her mother took her to gather nuts among the fallen leaves. Today she ‘
made her own path, bouncing this way and that way, vaguely keeping an eye
out for snakes. She found, in addition to various common but pretty ferns and
leaves, an armful of strange blue ﬂowers with velvety ridges and a sweet suds 113
bush full of the brown, fragrant buds.
By twelve o’clock, her arms laden with sprigs of her ﬁndings, she
was a mile or more from home. She had often been as far before, but the
strangeness of the land made it not as pleasant as her usual haunts. It seemed
gloomy in the little cove in which she found herself. The air was damp, the
silence close and deep.

From The Flowers by Alice Walker.

We tend to assume that third person narration creates distance. After all, we’re not
‘inside the head’ of a character as we are with ﬁrst person narration. Yet here the
writer uses third person narration (she) but whilst we watch her movements, we’re
also taken into her world. For example:

I Today she made her own path — straightforward physical ‘external’ description

I the strangeness ofthe land made it not as pleasant as her usual haunts — the
writer allows us access to Myop’s inner thoughts.

ACTIVITY 3.4

1 Note down at least one more example of each of these different modes of
narration from the extract.

2 Then write your own short paragraph describing a child in an outdoor
setting via third person narration. Do it in such a way that we see what
they do, where they go, etc. but at the same time are given access to their
feelings.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

TIP 3 As a writer, you have the power to direct or position your reader as yon

Don’t ignore seemingly
insignificant details, such as

choose, from being inside a character’s head, or outside. Now, rewrite your
paragraph in ﬁrst person narration.

’ . -
Charade“ names' In The 4 Once you have ﬁnished, compare your two versrons:

Flowers, the name Myop might

remind us of myopia (short—
sightedness) suggesting
that this is a child who does
not see, or has not seen,
the wider world and all its
unpleasantness.

 

I In what way does it change when you move to ﬁrst person narration?
Did it make you want to make any other changes? How did it change
the reader’s experience?

More on first person narration
We tend to think that ﬁrst person narration will allow us access to what our

narrator thinks and feels, and his or her reasons for acting in a particular way.
But writers use the ﬁrst person perspective in a wide variety of different ways.
We may, for example, follow without question our hero’s challenges as we
experience the story through their eyes. But what if that narration misleads
us, or allows us inside someone’s head but at the same time denies us complete

understanding?
Read this extract.

A chair, a table, a lamp. Above, on the white ceiling,
a relief ornament in the shape of a wreath, and in the
centre of it a blank space, plastered over, like the place
in a face where the eye has been taken out. There
must have been a chandelier, once. They’ve removed
anything you could tie a rope to.

A window, two white curtains. Under the window,
a window seat with a little cushion. When the window
is partly open — it only opens partly — the air can come
in and make the curtains move. I can sit in the chair,
or on the window seat, hands folded, and watch this.
Sunlight comes in through the window too, and falls
on the ﬂoor, which is made of wood, in narrow strips,
highly polished. I can smell the polish. There’s a rug on
the ﬂoor, oval, of braided rags. This is the kind of touch
they like: folk art, archaic, made by women, in their
spare time, from things that have no further use. A
return to traditional values. Waste not want not. I am
not being wasted. Why do I want?

On the wall above the chair, a picture, framed
but with no glass: a print of ﬂowers, blue irises,
watercolour. Flowers are still allowed. Does each of us
have the same print, the same chair, the same white
curtains, I wonder? Government issue?

'00 FURTHER RESEARCH

 

Think of it as being in the army, said Aunt Lydia.

A bed. Single, mattress medium-hard, covered
with a ﬂocked white spread. Nothing takes place
in the bed but sleep; or no sleep. I try not to think
too much. Like other things now, thought must be
rationed. There’s a lot that doesn’t bear thinking about.
Thinking can hurt your chances, and I intend to last. I
know why there is no glass, in front of the watercolour
picture of blue irises, and why the window only opens
partly and why the glass in it is shatterproof. It isn’t
running away they’re afraid of. We wouldn’t get far.
It’s those other escapes, the ones you can open in
yourself, given a cutting edge.

So. Apart from these details, this could be a college
guest room, for the less distinguished Visitors; or a
room in a rooming house, of former times, for ladies in
reduced circumstances. That is what we are now. The
circumstances have been reduced; for those of us who
still have circumstances.

But a chair, sunlight, ﬂowers: these are not to be
dismissed. I am alive, I live, I breathe, I put my hand
out, unfolded, into the sunlight.

From The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood.

 

 «gin-.m-  ;Unit 3: Imaginative writing

  

Work through Activity 3.5 then read this commentary from one student in
response to the text.

 

g on your own, make

orkin
es on these questions >-
 7 What do we ﬁnd out E The writer uses rather limited descriptive language to create an
about the narrator in this E apparently passive tone. The narrator seems to list or catalogue items
passage? 5' in an unemotional manner, as if nothing has greater value than anything
’ what has happened to 2 else (A chair, a table, a lamp... A Window, two White curtains. . . A bed... I
3‘ him/her? Can we be 8 Single, mattress medium—hard). There is emphaSIS on logical progressnon,

the positioning of objects, as if the eye of the narrator (and therefore the
reader) pans around the room like a camera taking in each component
(on the White ceiling  Under the window . .. When the Window is partly
open  on the floor . .. the wall above. .. in front of). The actions of the
narrator seem to be minimal (/ can sit in the chair, or on the window seat,
hands folded, and watch this), as if the writer is physically trapped in
some enclosed world, unable to escape.

r, certain or are we just

 

guessing?

 

' 1 This is an effective commentary, but it has not 2 Bearing in mind the skills used in the passage you
addressed all the elements in the passage. In small have just read, write a short passage of your own
groups, discuss the following questions in relation to of 175—200 words in which a character is conﬁned
the passage: within a place. Try to imitate the style of the piece you 115
I What indications are there that the traps are not haVe just read.
just physical, but psychological too? Use this grid of success criteria, checking as you go
I How does the writer show, through the narrator’s along and again when you have ﬁnished.

other actions and thoughts, that he or she still has
some hope and a sense of life?

Feature I Needswork I Undercontrol

lmply or show that the character cannot leave or is in some way a prisoner.

Focus on objects or decoration in a similar cataloguing manner and drawing
some conclusions from them. (Use shorter or minor sentences to achieve a
similar effect.)

Allow the reader some access to the thoughts and reflections of the narrator.

Use the same main tense throughout.

 

Third person narration

Third person narration is using the he/she/they form to describe the actions of
characters. It gives the writer the chance to ‘enter the heads’ of more than one
character, although in practice they may choose to focus on one main protagonist.Cambridge International AS Level English Language

 

All was prepared for the summer exodus: the trunks
packed, the household wound down, wound up, ready
to be abandoned to three months of withering heat
and engulﬁng dust while its owners withdrew to their
retreat in the mountains. The last few days were a
little uncomfortable — so many of their clothes already
packed away, so many of their books and papers
bundled up and ready for the move. The house looked
stark, with the silver put away, the vases emptied of
ﬂowers, the rugs and carpets rolled up; it was difficult
to get through this stretch, delayed by one thing or
another — a ﬁnal visit to the dentist, last instructions
to the Stockbrokers, a nephew to be entertained on

his way to Oxford. It was only the prospect of escape
from the blinding heat that already hammered at the
closed doors and windows, poured down on the roof
and verandas, and withdrawal to the freshness and
cool of the mountains which helped them to bear it.
Sinking down on veranda chairs to sip lemonade from
tall glasses, they sighed, ‘Well, we’ll soon be out of it.’
In that uncomfortable interlude, a postcard arrived — a
cheap, yellow printed postcard that for some reason

to do with his age, his generation, Raja still used.
Sarla’s hands began to tremble: news from Raja. In

Read the opening to this short story by Anita Desai:

   

a quivering voice she asked for her spectacles. Ravi
passed them to her and she peered through them to
decipher the words as if they were a ﬂight of migrating
birds in the distance: Raja was in India, at his ashram
in the south, Raja was going to be in Delhi next week,
Raja expected to ﬁnd her there. She would be there,
wouldn’t she? ‘You won’t desert me?’ After Ravi had
made several appeals to her for information, for a
sharing of the news, she lifted her face to him, grey
and mottled, and said in a broken voice, ‘Oh Ravi,
Raja has come. He is in the south. He wants to Visit

us — next week.’ It was only to be expected that Ravi ’s
hands would fall upon the table, fall onto china and
silverware, with a crash, making all rattle and jar. Raja
was coming! Raja was to be amongst them again!

A great shiver ran through the house like a wind
blowing that was not a wind so much as a stream of
shining light, shimmering and undulating through the
still, shadowy house, a radiant serpent, not without
menace, some threat of danger. Whether it liked it or
not, the house became the one chosen by Raja for a
Visitation, a house in waiting.

From ‘Royalty’ by Anita Desai.Discuss with a partner:

Unit 3: Imaginative writing

I In what way does the writer hold back information about the owners of the
house for the ﬁrst 9—10 lines or so?

I Who is the ﬁrst person mentioned by name? Is it one of the people who own the

house?

   

 

 

station at dawn.

 

emotion. Take this section:

I Although three people are mentioned in the third person, through whose eyes
do you think we are mainly seeing the story at this point?

The narrative mode is quite complex in terms of revealing information and

She would be there. wouldn’t she? ‘You won’t desert me?’ After Ravi made
several appeals to her for information, for a sharing of the news, she lifted her
face to him, grey and mottled, and said in a broken voice, ‘Oh Ravi, Raja has
come. He is in the south. He wants to Visit us — next week.’

So although this is a third person narration, the perspective is speciﬁcally
channelled through Sarla in these four ways.

ACTIVITY 3.7

In the next stage of the story, Sarla and Ravi go to meet Raja at Delhi railway

Write a further 125—150 words in a similar style describing the station and

Sarla and Ravi’s wait on the platform.

I Make Sarla’s thoughts the main focus of your passage but maintain the
use of the third person.

I Use indirect or reported speech for anything Ravi says.

Second person narration

There is another form of narration which is used more rarely — second person
narration. Read the following text:

Through the gate and up the walk toward the front
door. It’ll be good to get this gun belt off, the jacket,
the boots. You’ve earned your supper.

Locked, just as you instructed. You jangle the big
key ring, searching.

Open the door and the light blinds you. Fresh
bread, and the salty crackle of fat. On the ﬂoor of the
sitting room lies Amelia’s stuffed duck, toppled on
its side. You undo the gun belt — Marta won’t have it
around the child — and stow it high in the front closet,
thumping the door shut to announce yourself. When
no one comes, you make your way to the kitchen.

It’s empty, a wisp of steam ﬂoating up through a
hole in the stove top.

“Marta,” you call.

In the dining room the table’s set, your milk
poured, the high chair between the two seats so you
can each minister to her. The tray holds a spray of
crumbs, a slug of gravy. Maybe they couldn’t wait.

The back of the house is dark.

“Marta?”

You try your room ﬁrst, peering in the door. She’s
not on the bed, and immediately you turn to the
nursery.

It’s black, and you have to leave the hallway before
you see Marta sitting in the rocking chair, her hair a
bright frame, her face dark, impossible to read.

From A Prayer for the Dying by Stewart O’Nan.

6

117Cambridge InternationalAS Level English Language

  

TIP

Practise altering the form of
narration between I, he/she
and you to see what different '
effects you can create.

 
  
 

 

I see us from three hundred feet up, through the

eyes of the buzzard we had watched earlier, soaring,
circling and dipping in the tumult of currents: ﬁve
men running silently towards the centre of a hundred—
acre ﬁeld. I approached from the south-east, with

 
 

 

This passage shares some similarities with the previous passage on page 116 bit 
there are also some signiﬁcant differences.

ACTIVITY 3.8

1 Discuss this text with a partner, in particular what we learn about the you
of the narration and the tone/mood created. Think about:

I the use of the second person — what effect, if any, does it have on the
tone or mood of the piece? Think about the fact that the narrator is
simultaneously describing a ‘character’ doing something and using a
direct address to the reader.

I the use of tenses

I the range and nature of what is described and how they are presented
to the reader

I the positioning of the reader in terms of how and where the writer
directs our gaze

I what is implied and suggested by What we are told — or not told
I the use of speech or dialogue.

2 Share your ideas with another pair and make notes before writing up your
ideas as a brief commentary on the style and language of the extract.

Further practice

Look again at the text you wrote in the ﬁrst person in Activity 3.6 — about someone
conﬁned or imprisoned. Rewrite the text, or part of it, turning it into a second
person account (using you). "lhen look at both the original and the new version;
which of the two do you prefer? Is there a difference in the mood created?

Unreliable narration

Another type of narrator is the unreliable narrator — someone who deliberately
or unconsciously misrepresents the reality of events. Narrators can be said to be
‘unreliable’ for a number of reasons. It may be because:

I they do not understand or have only a partial picture of what is happening

I they deliberately mislead or misrepresent what is happening for their own
reasons.

In some cases, narrators are aware of their lack of knowledge and the way they
reveal ‘the truth’ about events can add to the impression of suspense, happiness,

sadness, tragedy, joy, etc. i . ’

 

Read the following extract. As you do so, think about the reasons why the
narrator of this passage is ‘unreliable’. Is the narrator deliberately misleading the
reader? Or is it simply that they do not have the full picture? Or both?

the wind at my back. About two hundred yards to
my left two men ran side by side. They were farm
labourers who had been repairing the fence along
the ﬁeld’s southern edge where it skirts the road. The
same distance beyond them was the motorist, John

@Unit 3: Imaginative writing

 

Logan, whose car was banked on the grass verge What was Clarissa doing? She said she walked

with its door, or doors, wide open. Knowing what I quickly towards the centre of the ﬁeld. I don’t know
know now, it’s odd to evoke the ﬁgure of Jed Parry how she resisted the urge to run. By the time it
directly ahead of me, emerging from a line of beeches happened — the event I am about to describe, the fall
on the far side of the ﬁeld a quarter of a mile away, — she had almost caught us up and was well placed
running into the wind. To the buzzard Parry and I as an observer, unencumbered by participation, by
were tiny forms, our white shirts brilliant against the ropes and the shouting, and by our lack of co-

the green, rushing towards each other like lovers, operation. What I describe is shaped by what Clarissa
innocent of the grief this entanglement would bring. saw too, by what we told each other in the time of

The encounter that would unhinge us was minutes obsessive re—examination that followed: the aftermath,
away, its enormity disguised from us not only by the an appropriate term for what happened in a ﬁeld
barrier of time but by the colossus in the centre of the waiting for its early summer mowing. The aftermath,
ﬁeld that drew us in with the power of a terrible ratio the second crop, the growth promoted by that ﬁrst cut
that set fabulous magnitude against the puny human in May.

distress at Its base‘ From Enduring Love by lan McEwan.

ACTIVITY 3.9

Write answers to these questions: '

I What do you think has ‘really’ happened here?

I Are the events told in retrospect, looking back with hindsight, or are they
told as they happened? Can you ﬁnd evidence of particular phrases that

suggest this?

I Why does the writer choose not to tell us the facts directly? And how does 119

the decision add to the tone and emotion of the passage?

These are difﬁcult questions and the piece is, perhaps deliberately, challenging.

In third person texts, be careful to distinguish between a narrative voice that is
closely linked and tied to the action, and one that is more objective and all-seeing.
The latter is often known as an omniscient narrator, who judges and observes
events. They may or may not be ‘reliable’. In The French Lieutenant’s Woman by
John Fowles, the narrator constantly switches between times and offers dilferent
narrative paths, even several different endings, to such an extent that trusting what
we read becomes quite difﬁcult.

ACTIVITY 3.10

Write the opening two paragraphs of a story called The Letter. In it, someone
close to the narrator receives a letter which has a big impact. Try to convey the
idea that the narrator is unreliable in one of these ways:

' ' ‘ FU HER RESEARCH

 

I The narrator has a different View of the letter than the reality (e.g. he/she i
doesn’t think it’s as serious as it is). You could start: The letter said her
grandmother was sick, which wasn’t such a big deal, surely? After all, my
wife hadn’t seen her for twenty years and 

I The narrator doesn’t know the full story and only reveals what he or she
can see at the time. You could start: By the time, the postman had called,
the envelope lay torn on the table, the letter removed. My husband was in
the backyard and Igot on with things as usual

6